New Year, New Skills |  50% off
Unlimited data and AI learning for 2025
Buy Now

Skip to main content
Write for us
EN
Blogs
Tutorials
docs
Podcasts
Cheat Sheets
code-alongs

Category


Request a Demo
Home
Tutorials
Python
Coding Best Practices and Guidelines for Better Code
Learn coding best practices to improve your programming skills. Explore coding guidelines for collaboration, code structure, efficiency, and more.
Oct 12, 2023
 · 26 min read
Contents
Code Best Practices: Structure and Organization
Choose meaningful variable and function names
Camel case vs snake case
Use of comments and whitespace effectively
Using indentation and consistent formatting
What should be documented?
Creating reader-friendly README files
Docstrings
Coding Best Practices: Efficient Data Processing
Coding Best Practices: Scaling and Performance
Best Practices For Version Control and Collaboration
Code Review and Refactoring Best Practices
Error Handling and Testing
Security and Privacy Considerations
Continued Learning and Growth
Conclusion
Share
Creating code is an essential part of many data professions. But creating code that functions is only half the job. The code also needs to be clear, easy to hand off, and robust to disturbances. By following a few coding guidelines in your projects, you can save yourself time restructuring your code later on and make your collaborators happy, too.

Here, we explore some of the coding best practices and guidelines that can help make your code clearer and more accessible.

Code Best Practices: Structure and Organization
A clear structure provides more readability to your code, making it easier to debug and share. There are several things you can do while writing your code to make the structure more clear and organized.

Choose meaningful variable and function names
When choosing names for variables and functions, it’s important to choose names that are relevant and meaningful.

For example, let’s assume you are creating a program to handle bank account information, and you need a variable to hold the account number. You may be tempted to call this variable “number” or “n”. However, those are not very informative names for someone who may be looking at your code for the first time. The name “account_number” provides much more information and can be easier to follow later in the code.

For example, imagine you find the following equation halfway through a long stretch of code. Can you tell what this equation is doing?


ab=pb+d-w
Powered By 
This may be a challenging equation to come across during a code review. Consider this alternative.


account_balance=previous_balance+deposit-withdrawal
Powered By 
With more informative variable names, it is much less frustrating to follow the logic in a piece of code. This same concept applies to function names. A function called “name_change” is much more informative than “change”, “update”, or “nc”.

Camel case vs snake case
There are two generally accepted conventions for creating variable or function names: camel case and snake case. Camel case uses capital letters to separate words in a variable name. Snake case uses underscores to separate words in variables. For example, we would have the variable name “accountNumber” in camel case and “account_number” in snake case.

Which convention you use depends on your personal preference, your company’s coding standards, and the programming language you are using. However, whichever case you choose, it is important to stick with it throughout your entire project. Switching between different naming conventions looks sloppy and can be visually confusing.

Use of comments and whitespace effectively
An easy way to make your code more readable is to add descriptive comments throughout. Good commenting will ensure your code is decipherable by someone else. You should add comments to explain what each section of code is doing, especially any complex equations or functions. You may also want to add comments to variable definitions, to give credit to any copied code, to include a reference to source data, or to leave yourself “to do” notes within the code.

When leaving yourself “to do” notes, consider starting the comment with “TODO”. This capitalization will stand out visually, and it is easily searchable, so you can find all the notes you left for yourself.

Comments are used to make the code clearer and more understandable, not to make up for badly structured code. They should be clear and consistent and enhance well-structured code blocks.

Whitespace is also useful to visually format your code. Think of whitespace like paragraphs. Paragraphs help to break up large chunks of text so you can quickly scan it. Similarly, adding whitespace strategically in your code makes it easier to scan through the code to find bugs and follow what it’s doing. Consider adding space between different sections or modules.

Consider the following examples:


product_price=materials_cost+manufacturing_cost+shipping_cost
state_tax=product_price*state_tax_rate(state)
federal_tax=product_price*federal_tax_rate
total_tax=state_tax+federal_tax
total_cost=product_price+total_tax
Powered By 
In this first example, the text is squished together and challenging to decipher. However, by separating out the content and using comments and whitespace, we can make this section much more readable.


#Calculate the price of the product
product_price=materials_cost+manufacturing_cost+shipping_cost
 
#Calculate the tax owed
state_tax=product_price*state_tax_rate(state)
federal_tax=product_price*federal_tax_rate
total_tax=state_tax+federal_tax
 
#Calculate the total cost
total_cost=product_price+total_tax

#TODO create function for looking up state tax rates 
Powered By 
Using indentation and consistent formatting
Throughout your code, consistency is key. In some languages, you can use indentation to visually separate different sections. This can be useful to differentiate sections that work inside of loops, for example. Beware: some languages, like Python, use indentation functionally, so you may be unable to use it for visual differentiation.

Consistent formatting is important as it improves readability and meets reader expectations.

Documentation and communication
Many programming tasks in data professions are team efforts. Even if you spend long periods coding in solitude, that code will often be sent around to a team for review and use. This makes it imperative that communication about the code be clear within the team.

When sending code to a teammate, it’s important to send information about the code’s purpose, proper use, and any quirks they need to consider about the code while running it. This type of communication is called documentation and should always accompany the code.

The convention is to provide this documentation within a text file called README.txt that is stored in the same folder as the main code file. However, specific teams may have different standards for documentation, such as using Notion or a Google Doc.

What should be documented?
The documentation file should include everything someone would need to know to take over the project. There should be information about how to use the code, the code’s purpose, architecture, and design. You should include notes about what the inputs and outputs are when the code is run, as well as any quirks.

It’s also useful to add information about error detection and maintenance. Depending on your company’s coding standards, you may also include author information, project completion dates, or other information.

Creating reader-friendly README files
When writing README files, it’s important to maintain a clear structure. Clearly label your inputs and outputs and the different sections of your document. Put the most important information for your user at the top. Anything that is critical should be labeled and made to stand out with either all caps, a series of dashes, or something else.

Example of documentation coding best practices.

Docstrings
A docstring can be useful for someone who is using your code for the first time. This is a string literal written into your code that provides information about the code. In Python, if you use the command line to find documentation on a class, method, or function, the text that is displayed is the docstring within that code.

Here is an example of a docstring for a function:


def calculate_total_price(unit_price, quantity):
    """
    Calculate the total price of items based on unit price and quantity.
 
    Args:
        unit_price (float): The price of a single item.
        quantity (int): The number of items purchased.
 
    Returns:
        float: The total price after multiplying unit price by quantity.
 
    Example:
        >>> calculate_total_price(10.0, 5)
        50.0
    """
    total_price = unit_price * quantity
    return total_price
Powered By 
Documenting your code may seem like a lot of work, especially when you already know the ins and outs of your program. But proper documentation can save tons of time when passing your code off to someone else or when revisiting an old project you haven’t worked with in a while. Here’s an article where you can read more about best practices for documenting Python code.

Coding Best Practices: Efficient Data Processing
In addition to clarity, good code should run efficiently. You can include a few practices in your writing to ensure your code processes data efficiently.

Avoiding unnecessary loops and iterations
Loops are often very processor-heavy tasks. One or two loops may be unavoidable, but too many loops can quickly bog down an otherwise efficient program. By limiting the number of loops and iterations you have in your code, you can boost your code’s performance.

Vectorizing operations for performance
One way to reduce the number of loops in your code is to vectorize operations. This means performing an operation on an entire vector at once instead of going through each value one at a time.


list_a = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
list_b = [6, 7, 8, 9, 10]
result = []
 
for i in range(len(list_a)):
    result.append(list_a[i] + list_b[i])
 
print(result)
Powered By 
In this example, we use a for loop to add two lists together. By vectorizing, we can remove the loop and concatenate the two lists without iterating.


import numpy as np
 
list_a = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
list_b = [6, 7, 8, 9, 10]
 
array_a = np.array(list_a)
array_b = np.array(list_b)
 
result = array_a + array_b
 
print(result)
Powered By 
Another technique for reducing loops in Python is to use list comprehensions, which you can learn more about in DataCamp’s Python list comprehension tutorial.

Memory management and optimization techniques
Efficient memory management is crucial for data processing apps. Inefficient memory usage can lead to performance bottlenecks and even app crashes. To optimize memory usage, consider the following techniques:

Memory profiling
Use memory profiling tools to identify memory leaks and areas of excessive memory consumption in your code. Profilers help pinpoint the parts of your program that need optimization and allow you to focus your efforts on the most critical areas.

Data serialization and compression
When dealing with large datasets, consider serializing data to disk or using data compression. Serialization reduces memory usage by storing data in a compact format, while compression further reduces storage requirements.

Data chunking
If you're processing extremely large datasets that don't fit into your allotted memory, try data chunking. This involves dividing the data into smaller, manageable chunks that can be processed sequentially or in parallel. It helps avoid excessive memory usage and allows you to work with larger datasets.

DataCamp has a great course on writing efficient Python code.

Coding Best Practices: Scaling and Performance
It is a good idea to keep performance in mind while coding. After you’ve designed and written your initial code, you should edit it to further improve performance.

Profiling code for performance bottlenecks
A process called profiling allows you to find the slowest parts of your program so you can focus your editing efforts there. Many IDEs (Integrated Development Environments) have profiling software built in that allows you to easily find the bottlenecks in your code and improve them.

Parallel processing
Once you have identified bottlenecks, you need to find the best methods of resolving them. One technique is parallel processing. This is a technique that involves splitting a task between multiple processors on your computer or in the cloud. This can be very useful if you have thousands of calculations that need to be computed.

Strategies for handling larger datasets
As your program scales, you'll likely encounter larger datasets that need to be processed efficiently. Implementing the right strategies is essential to avoid performance degradation.

Data partitioning
Partition large datasets into manageable chunks. This approach, known as data partitioning, allows you to process data in parallel and distribute the workload across multiple processing units. Additionally, it minimizes the memory requirements for processing.

Data compression
Consider using data compression techniques to reduce the storage and transmission overhead of large datasets. Compression libraries like zlib and Snappy can significantly decrease the size of data without compromising its integrity.

Distributed databases
Distributed database solutions like Apache Cassandra, Amazon DynamoDB, or Google Cloud Bigtable can help manage large datasets. These databases are designed to handle massive datasets and provide efficient data storage and retrieval mechanisms.

Balancing optimization with code readability
Some optimization techniques also improve the readability of the code. However, other optimizations may make it harder to follow what’s going on. It’s important to balance these two goals when writing and optimizing your code.

If a technique will greatly improve the efficiency of your program, it might be worth it looking a little more convoluted. If you do this, you should be sure to document it well. On the other hand, a technique that will save you only a little bit of time may not be worth it if it makes it much harder to read.

Best Practices For Version Control and Collaboration
When writing code, a useful tool is version control software. By far the most popular version of this is Git. Git saves previous versions of your code, allowing you to make changes and always revert to an earlier version if you make a catastrophic mistake. It’s essentially a backup. Git also facilitates collaboration on a project by easily highlighting differences and resolving conflicts.

Check out our introduction to version control with Git course for more details.

Importance of version control systems (e.g., Git)
Using a version control system is almost as vital as saving your work. It allows for a record of your progress, a backup of successful versions, and an easy venue to publish your work. Let’s go over the advantages of using git for independent as well as collaborative coding projects.

Collaborative coding
One way to collaborate on a project is to pass versions back and forth one at a time. In this system, each programmer essentially “checks out” the code, works on their section, and passes it on to the next programmer. This is slow and inefficient. It can also result in problems if two people accidentally work on the file at the same time, resulting in two different versions of the same code.

A better solution is to use a version control system like Git. With Git, multiple programmers can work on the code simultaneously. When they push their code changes to the main repository, there is a simple process used to merge the different parts of the code so everything works together. Once merged, the newly updated code is freely available to everyone with access to the repository. This allows each programmer to work on the newest version of the code.

Git also provides an easy way to initiate a code review process.

Independent coding
When you are the only person working on a project, it can be tempting to skip using Git for simplicity. However, there are several compelling reasons to use Git as part of your workflow, even for independent projects.

One of the most compelling reasons to use Git on independent projects is to retain the ability to revert to an earlier version of the code if it stops performing the way you expect. For example, say you add a new analysis to a recommender system you created. The analysis seems to be working fine, but suddenly, the original recommender system starts having problems. It seems obvious that the problem is due to the new analysis, but where specifically did the problem crop up? It can be useful to have a version without the analysis to look at side by side with the new version to trace the problem.

Git also allows you to easily publish your code so others can view it or use it. This is very useful for setting up a portfolio, creating open-source programs, or sending code to customers. Then, if you need to update your code for any reason, it is easy to push a new version.

Setting up and managing repositories
If you are working on a team, you may contribute to an already established repository. However, you may need to start a repository yourself. Fortunately, platforms like GitHub and Bitbucket have very user-friendly instructions for creating a new repository.

Once established, you will need to share your repository with your collaborators, keep on top of pull requests and merges, and ensure every contributor is following similar commit rules.

Collaborative workflows (branching, merging, pull requests)
There are a few terms that are useful to know when working with Git.

Branching
When two different versions of the same code are created, this is referred to as branching.

Merging
Merging is the process of resolving the differences between two or more branches to create a single version of the code.

Pull requests
When a programmer wants a version of the code in a repository, they will issue a pull request. This is essentially permission to download a version of the code to work with.

Pushes
When a programmer adds a new version of the code to the repository, this is called pushing a new version. DataCamp’s Git Push/Pull tutorial explains the differences between these terms and how to use each.

Handling conflicts and maintaining a clean commit history
If multiple contributors modify the same lines of code, Git will flag it as a merge conflict. Resolving conflicts involves manually editing the conflicting code to reconcile the changes, essentially choosing which version of that line of code to keep. After resolution, you can commit the changes and continue with the merge.

Maintain a clean and informative commit history by writing clear and concise commit messages. Follow a consistent format and describe the purpose of each commit. This helps track the changes over time so everyone can understand the project's history.

For more information about Git, I highly recommend DataCamp’s Introduction to Git and GitHub Concepts courses.

Code Review and Refactoring Best Practices
Conducting effective code reviews for quality assurance
A code review is a fantastic way to improve your code and your programming skills. This is basically a peer review, where someone else will go through your code and provide feedback.

If you work on a team, you may have mandatory code reviews on a regular basis.

However, even if you work alone, it is a good idea to solicit occasional code reviews to keep your code up to standard. It’s also a great way to learn new ways of doing things and to learn about security issues you may not already be familiar with.

Identifying code smells and when to refactor
Have you ever opened your refrigerator and noticed a bad smell that put you on a search for what had spoiled? If so, you are familiar with using smell as an indicator of something going bad. This same idea is used in code reviews.

Of course, when doing a code review, you are not literally using your nose to sniff the code. But reviewers look for indicators of something gone wrong, which are called code smells.

Some problems may require a simple change to one line of code to repair. However, other problems may require you to rethink an entire section or the entire document.

These larger fixes, where you are changing the structure of the underlying code without changing the functionality of the code, are called refactoring. For example, this can be done to repair a security flaw while keeping the user experience identical.

Error Handling and Testing
Importance of error handling and testing
Testing your code is imperative to ensure that your code is doing what you think it should. Try testing your code with small, fictional datasets where you know what the outcome should be and check that your program gives the expected answer. If you have the time and resources, testing your code on multiple datasets that test different aspects of your program can ensure your code is working the way you expect.

If you create code that is going to be in place for a while, like a data pipeline or an app, it’s particularly important to consider error handling. Errors can occur when your data sources have changed or when your end user does something unexpected. Adding blocks of code that handle expected errors can keep your program running without crashes.

Test-driven development
Test-Driven Development (TDD) is a foundational principle in software engineering that you should incorporate into your coding projects. This approach places testing at the forefront of the development process, ensuring that every piece of code is rigorously evaluated before it's considered complete.

By adhering to TDD principles, you create a safety net of tests that not only verify the correctness of your code but also help to guide the development process itself. It’s a proactive stance on testing which results in code that is more resilient, easier to maintain, and less prone to defects.

Writing unit tests to validate code functionality
Unit tests are tests written to validate certain parts of your code. For example, you may run a unit test on a function you write to convert units from Celsius to Fahrenheit. In this unit test, you ask whether your code gets the correct answer to a specific example.

Python has two libraries that are particularly useful for writing unit tests, unittest and pytest. Writing comprehensive unit tests not only boosts the reliability of your code but also serves as documentation, illustrating how different parts of your software should behave.


import unittest
 
# The function we want to test
def square(x):
    return x ** 2
 
# Create a test class that inherits from unittest.TestCase
class TestSquare(unittest.TestCase):
 
    # Define a test case for the square function
    def test_square_positive_number(self):
        result = square(5)
        self.assertEqual(result, 25)  # Assert that the result is equal to 25
 
if __name__ == '__main__':
    unittest.main()
Powered By 
This is an example of a unit test for a simple function and its output.


#OUTPUT
.
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Ran 1 test in 0.001s
 
OK
Powered By 
Using try-except blocks for robust code execution
Incorporating try-except blocks into your code is a fundamental error-handling technique that can significantly enhance code robustness.

These blocks allow you to gracefully handle unexpected situations or exceptions that may arise during program execution.

By anticipating potential errors and defining how your code should react to them, you can prevent crashes and unexpected behavior, leading to a more user-friendly and reliable app. Whether it's handling file I/O errors, network connectivity issues, or input validation problems, judicious use of try-except blocks can make your code more resilient and user-friendly.


try:
    num = int(input("Enter a number: "))
    result = 10 / num  # Attempt to perform division
except ZeroDivisionError:
    result = None  # Set result to None if division by zero occurs
 
print(f"Result of the division: {result}")
Powered By 
Security and Privacy Considerations
Safeguarding sensitive data
You may work on a project with some sensitive data such as health information, passwords, or personally identifying information. There are several laws in place restricting the way these types of data can be used and how they must be safeguarded. It is important to work these safeguards into your code as you create it.

In other cases, you may be working with code that is important to keep secure for nonlegal reasons, such as dealing with company secrets. When writing your code, and definitely before deploying any code, you should ensure that this data is kept secure. Below are a few coding security best practices.

Data minimization
It’s important to collect only the data that is absolutely necessary for your project. Avoid collecting excessive information that could be misused if your system is compromised. Additionally, you can implement data retention policies to delete data that is no longer needed.

Access control
Implement robust access controls to ensure that only authorized users and processes can access sensitive data. Role-based access control can help secure sensitive data. Regularly review and audit access permissions to detect and rectify any unauthorized access.

Data encryption
Encryption is a fundamental technique for protecting data. Use strong encryption algorithms and protocols to secure data stored in databases, on disk, and during data transmission over networks. Implement encryption libraries and APIs that are well-vetted and maintained to avoid common vulnerabilities.

Encryption and secure coding practices
Secure coding practices are essential for building apps that can withstand security threats. When it comes to encryption and secure coding, consider the following recommendations:

Input validation
Always validate and sanitize user inputs to prevent common security vulnerabilities such as SQL injection, cross-site scripting, and command injection. Input validation ensures that malicious input cannot compromise your app's security.

Secure libraries and components
When using third-party libraries or components, verify their security posture. Keep them updated to patch known vulnerabilities. Additionally, consider using security-focused libraries and frameworks that are designed to mitigate common security risks.

Regular security testing
Incorporate regular security testing into your development process. This includes conducting penetration testing, code reviews, and vulnerability assessments. Automated tools can help identify security flaws, but manual testing by security experts is highly recommended.

Secure authentication and authorization
Implement secure authentication mechanisms, such as multi-factor authentication, and robust authorization controls to ensure that users only have access to the resources they need. Avoid hardcoding credentials or sensitive information in your code or configuration files.

Keeping up to date on security threats is a constantly moving target as bad actors continually update their tactics. DataCamp has an introduction to data privacy course to help you get started. Once you’ve got some fundamentals, try a security wargame like Bandit to test out your new skills.

Continued Learning and Growth
Data is a dynamic field, with new technologies, languages, and libraries constantly emerging. To stay competitive and relevant in the industry, it's essential to make continued learning and growth a central part of your career. One crucial aspect of this is staying updated with coding trends and libraries.

Make it a habit to allocate time for learning new concepts, languages, and tools. Subscribe to newsletters, follow tech blogs, and attend webinars or conferences relevant to your field. Explore online courses and tutorials that provide hands-on experience with the latest technologies. By staying informed, you can leverage new tools and methodologies to improve your coding skills and productivity.

Engaging with the coding community and forums
Join online forums
Participate in coding forums like Stack Overflow, GitHub discussions, or specialized forums related to your programming languages and interests. Contribute by answering questions and sharing your knowledge. Engaging in discussions and solving real-world problems not only helps others but also reinforces your own understanding of coding concepts.

Attend meetups and conferences
Local and virtual coding meetups and conferences provide excellent opportunities to connect with like-minded individuals, share experiences, and learn from experts. These events often feature workshops, talks, and networking sessions that can expand your knowledge and professional network. Check out this list of data conferences to get started.

Leveraging online resources for continuous improvement
The internet is a treasure trove of resources for developers seeking continuous improvement. Take advantage of online courses, tutorials, and coding challenges to hone your skills and tackle new challenges.

Online courses
Online Courses offered by DataCamp provide high-quality, structured learning experiences. These courses cover a wide range of topics, from coding fundamentals to advanced topics like data science and cybersecurity. A good place to start is with general coding courses like Introduction to Python, Writing Functions in Python, and Intermediate R. You may also want to try more focused courses at an advanced level, like a course on object-oriented programming.

Coding challenges and practice platforms
Websites like LeetCode, Kaggle, HackerRank, and CodeSignal offer coding challenges and competitions that allow you to practice problem-solving and algorithmic skills. Regularly participating in these challenges sharpens your coding abilities and prepares you for technical interviews. DatCamp also occasionally runs challenges, and has a wide range of practical problems and real data science projects you can use to hone your skills.

Open-source contributions
Consider contributing to open-source projects. This not only allows you to work on real-world data analysis projects but also exposes you to collaborative coding practices and diverse coding styles.

Conclusion
Programming is more than just writing code that is functional. Your code needs to be clear, organized, efficient, and scalable, while keeping in mind quality and security. By embracing these coding best practices, you will not only create better code but also elevate your skills. Consider taking courses about software engineering principles as well as language-specific best practices guides, like those outlined in this Python best practices tutorial. In a world where precision and reliability are paramount, these coding practices serve as the guiding principles that empower data professionals to excel, innovate, and make a lasting impact.

Amberle McKee's photo
Author
Amberle McKee
I am a PhD with 13 years of experience working with data in a biological research environment. I create software in several programming languages including Python, MATLAB, and R. I am passionate about sharing my love of learning with the world.

Topics
Python
R
Amberle McKee's photo
Amberle McKee
A PhD with 13 years of experience working with data in a biological research environment.
Topics
Python
R
Data Skills
6 Python Best Practices for Better Code
Zen of Python
Lessons from the Zen of Python
How to Document Python Code
Leveraging the Best of both Python and R
Related
Data Skills
blog

6 Python Best Practices for Better Code
Discover the Python coding best practices for writing best-in-class Python scripts.
Javier Canales Luna's photo
Javier Canales Luna

13 min

Zen of Python
blog

Lessons from the Zen of Python
Learn about the Zen of Python and discover the principles of writing clean, elegant code in Python.
Kurtis Pykes 's photo
Kurtis Pykes

12 min

tutorial

How to Document Python Code
Learn why there is a need for documenting code and best practices to do it. Further, learn to leverage the potential of the Pydoc module for documenting purposes.
Aditya Sharma's photo
Aditya Sharma

14 min

tutorial

Leveraging the Best of both Python and R
Learn how to use Python and R in conjunction with each other to utilize the best of both in a single data science project.
Parul Pandey's photo
Parul Pandey

9 min

tutorial

Basic Programming Skills in R
Practice basic programming skills in R by using course material from DataCamp's free Model a Quantitative Trading Strategy in R course.
Ryan Sheehy's photo
Ryan Sheehy

5 min

tutorial

30 Cool Python Tricks For Better Code With Examples
We've curated 30 cool Python tricks you could use to improve your code and develop your Python skills.
Kurtis Pykes 's photo
Kurtis Pykes

24 min

Grow your data skills with DataCamp for Mobile
Make progress on the go with our mobile courses and daily 5-minute coding challenges.

Download on the App Store
Get it on Google Play
Learn
Learn Python
Learn R
Learn AI
Learn SQL
Learn Power BI
Learn Tableau
Learn Data Engineering
Assessments
Career Tracks
Skill Tracks
Courses
Data Science Roadmap
Data Courses
Python Courses
R Courses
SQL Courses
Power BI Courses
Tableau Courses
Alteryx Courses
Azure Courses
Google Sheets Courses
AI Courses
Data Analysis Courses
Data Visualization Courses
Machine Learning Courses
Data Engineering Courses
Probability & Statistics Courses
DataLab
Get Started
Pricing
Security
Documentation
Certification
Certifications
Data Scientist
Data Analyst
Data Engineer
SQL Associate
Power BI Data Analyst
Tableau Certified Data Analyst
Azure Fundamentals
AI Fundamentals
Resources
Resource Center
Upcoming Events
Blog
Code-Alongs
Tutorials
Docs
Open Source
RDocumentation
Course Editor
Book a Demo with DataCamp for Business
Data Portfolio
Portfolio Leaderboard
Plans
Pricing
For Business
For Universities
Discounts, Promos & Sales
DataCamp Donates
For Business
Business Pricing
Teams Plan
Data & AI Unlimited Plan
Customer Stories
Partner Program
About
About Us
Learner Stories
Careers
Become an Instructor
Press
Leadership
Contact Us
DataCamp Español
DataCamp Português
DataCamp Deutsch
DataCamp Français
Support
Help Center
Become an Affiliate
Facebook
Twitter
LinkedIn
YouTube
Instagram
Privacy Policy
Cookie Notice
Do Not Sell My Personal Information
Accessibility
Security
Terms of Use
© 2025 DataCamp, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Skip to main content
Transform your testing process with: Real Device Cloud, Company-wide Licences & Accessibility Testing

BrowserStack Logo
Products
Developers
Live for Teams
Pricing
Sign in
Free Trial

Coding Standards and Best Practices to Follow
Align your code with best practices and deliver the best code quality without any code issues

June 28, 2024  12 min read
Get Started freeContact Sales
Guide Banner Image
Home
Guide
Coding Standards and Best Practices to Follow
Coding Standards and Best Practices to Follow
Coding standards are a set of guidelines and best practices that developers follow while writing code. These standards cover various aspects such as naming conventions, code organization, indentation, commenting, error handling, and more. Consider coding standards as rules, techniques, and best practices to develop cleaner, more readable, and more efficient code with minimal error.

Let’s understand the advantages/purpose of maintaining coding standards in software engineering and learn about a few coding practices for writing and running clean, correct code that delivers accurate and relevant results in this guide.

Purpose of having Coding Standards
Coding standards play a crucial role in software development. Here’s why having coding standards matters:

Consistency: Coding standards ensure uniformity across codebases, making it easier for developers to read, understand, and maintain code.
Readability: Well-defined standards enhance code readability, reducing errors and improving collaboration.
Error Prevention: Consistent practices help catch common mistakes early, preventing bugs and improving code quality.
Scalability: Adhering to standards ensures code can scale without becoming unwieldy or unmanageable.
Cross-Team Collaboration: Shared standards facilitate collaboration among developers, even in large teams.
Code Reviews: Standards provide clear criteria for code reviews, leading to more effective feedback.
Efficient Maintenance: Following standards simplifies debugging, refactoring, and maintenance tasks.
BrowserStack Code Quality Banner

Coding Best Practices & Guidelines to Follow
There are many coding best practices and guidelines provided to ensure that the code is clear, maintainable, and robust. Let’s discuss the major practices below:

1. Choose Industry-Specific Coding Standards
Coding best practices and standards vary depending on the industry a specific product is being built for. The standards required for coding software for luxury automobiles will differ from those for gaming software.

For example, MISRA C and C++ were written for the automotive industry and are considered the de-facto standards for building applications that emphasize safety. They are the absolute best practices for writing code in the industry.

Adhering to industry-specific coding standards in software engineering makes writing correct code that matches product expectations easier. Writing code that will satisfy the end-users and meet business requirements becomes easier.

Also Read: Understanding the Software Development Process

2. Focus on Code readability
Readable code is easy to follow and optimizes space and time. Here are a few ways to achieve that:

Write as few lines as possible.
Use appropriate naming conventions.
Segment blocks of code in the same section into paragraphs.
Use indentation to mark the beginning and end of control structures. Specify the code between them.
Don’t use lengthy functions. Ideally, a single function should carry out a single task.
Use the DRY (Don’t Repeat Yourself) principle. Automate repetitive tasks whenever necessary. The same piece of code should not be repeated in the script.
Avoid Deep Nesting. Too many nesting levels make code harder to read and follow.
Capitalize SQL special words and function names to distinguish them from table and column names.
Avoid long lines. It is easier for humans to read blocks of lines that are horizontally short and vertically long.
3. Meaningful Names
Choose meaningful names that convey the purpose of the variable or function. Consistent naming conventions enhance clarity and maintainability.

// Bad

const cust = "John"

const customer = "Alice"



// Better

const customerName = "John"

const customerFullName = "Alice Johnson"

Different naming conventions used in coding –

Camel Case – In camel case, you start a name with a lowercase letter. If the name has multiple words, the later words begin with capital letters. Camel case is commonly used in JavaScript for variable and function names.
For Example:

const userName = "Smith";
                       

function reverseName(name) {

return name.split("").reverse().join("");

}

Snake Case – In snake case, you start the name with a lowercase letter. If the name has multiple words, the later words are also lowercase, and you use an underscore (_) to separate them.
For Example:

const user_name = "Smith";

Kebab Case – Kebab case is similar to snake case, but you use a hyphen (-) instead of an underscore (_) to separate the words.
For Example:

const user-name = "Smith";

Pascal Case (Upper Camel Case): – Names in pascal case start with a capital letter. For names with multiple words, all words begin with capital letters. Pascal case is typically used for class names in both Python and JavaScript.
For Example:

class Person {

constructor(firstName, lastName) {

this.firstName = firstName;

this.lastName = lastName;

    }

}

4. Avoid using a Single Identifier for multiple purposes
Ascribe a name to each variable that clearly describes its purpose. A single variable can’t be assigned various values or utilized for numerous functions. This would confuse everyone reading the code and make future enhancements more challenging. Always assign unique variable names.

When the same variable or function name is used to represent different concepts or purposes within the code, it can lead to confusion, bugs, and unintended behavior.

For Example:

function outerFunction() {

    let count = 10;



    function innerFunction() {

        // Oops! This 'count' shadows the outer one.

        const count = 20;

        console.log(count);

    }



    innerFunction();

    console.log(count);  // Prints 10, not 20

}

5. Add Comments and Prioritize Documentation
Comments serve as a form of documentation within the code, explaining the logic, functionality, or purpose of specific sections. Well-placed comments transform complex algorithms or intricate business rules into understandable pieces of information.

For Example:

// TODO: Refactor this function for better performance

function processItems(items) {

// ... existing logic ...



// TODO: Optimize the sorting algorithm

items.sort((a, b) => a.value - b.value);



if (items.length === 0) {

console.warn("Empty items array!");

    }

}

When to add comments:

Include comments for intricate or non-obvious code segments.
Explain business rules, domain-specific logic, or regulatory requirements.
Clarify how your code handles edge cases or exceptional scenarios.
Document workarounds due to limitations or external dependencies.
Mark areas where improvements or additional features are needed.
When Not to add comments:

Avoid redundant comments that merely repeat what the code already expresses clearly.
If the code’s purpose is evident (e.g., simple variable assignments), skip unnecessary comments.
Remove temporary comments used for debugging once the issue is resolved.
Incorrect comments can mislead other developers, so ensure accuracy.
6. Efficient Data Processing
Divide code into smaller, self-contained modules or functions for reusability and maintainability. Identify inefficient algorithms or data structures and refactor for better performance.

// Modularization

function calculateTax(income) {

    // Tax calculation logic

    return income * 0.2;

}



// Encapsulation

class User {

    constructor(name) {

        this.name = name;

    }

    greet() {

        console.log(`Hello, ${this.name}!`);

    }

}

7. Effective Version Control and Collaboration
Ensure all developers follow consistent coding techniques. Use automation tools for version control workflows.

8. Effective Code Review and Refactoring
Engage QA during refactoring to prevent new bugs. Isolate debugging from refactoring to maintain stability.

// Before refactoring

function calculateTotal(items) {

    let total = 0;

    for (const item of items) {

        total += item.price;

    }

    return total;

}



// After refactoring

function calculateTotal(items) {

    return items.reduce((acc, item) => acc + item.price, 0);

}

9. Try to formalize Exception Handling
‘Exception’ refers to problems, issues, or uncommon events that occur when code is run and disrupt the normal flow of execution. This either pauses or terminates program execution, a scenario that must be avoided.

Exception handling is a critical aspect of programming, allowing developers to gracefully manage unexpected or erroneous situations. When an error occurs during program execution, the normal flow is disrupted, and an “exception” object containing information about the error is created. Exception handling involves responding to these exceptions effectively.

However, when they do occur, use the following techniques to minimize damage to overall execution in terms of both time and dev effort:

Keep the code in a try-catch block.
Ensure that auto recovery has been activated and can be used.
Consider that it might be an issue of software/network slowness. Wait a few seconds for the required elements to show up.
Use real-time log analysis.
Here are the key components of exception handling:

Try block: The try block encapsulates code where an error might occur. If an exception occurs within this block, control transfers to the corresponding catch block.
For Example:

try {

    // code that may throw an exception



    const numerator = 10;

    const denominator = 0;



 // throws a division by zero exception

    const result = numerator / denominator;



 // skipped due to the exception

    console.log("Result:", result);

} 

catch (error) {

// handle the exception

    console.error("Error:", error.message); 

}

Catch block: The catch block catches and handles exceptions thrown within the try block.
For Example:

try {

    // ...

} catch (error) {



// Handle the exception

    console.error("Error:", error.message);

 }

Finally block (optional): The finally block executes regardless of whether an exception occurs or not. It is commonly used for cleanup tasks (e.g., closing files, releasing resources).
For Example:

try {

    // ...

} catch (error) {

  // …

} finally {



// Executed always

    console.log("Cleanup tasks here"); 

}

Learn more about Exception Handling in Selenium WebDriver.

10. Security and Privacy Considerations
Extract insights without compromising privacy. Acquire maximum insight from consented data for customer benefit.

// Collect only necessary user data

const userData = {

    userId: 123,

    // Other non-sensitive fields

};

11. Standardize Headers for Different Modules
It is easier to understand and maintain code when the headers of different modules align with a singular format. For example, each header should contain:

Module Name
Date of creation
Name of creator of the module
History of modification
Summary of what the module does
Functions in that module
Variables accessed by the module
12. Turn Daily Backups into an instinct
Multiple events can trigger data loss – system crash, dead battery, software glitch, hardware damage, etc. To prevent this, save code daily, and after every modification, no matter how minuscule it may be, back up the workflow on TFS, SVN, or any other version control mechanism.

Talk to an Expert

13. When choosing standards, think Closed vs. Open
Consider CERT vs. MISRA. CERT emphasizes community cooperation and participation. It offers a coding standard that is freely available as a web-based wiki.

With CERT, users can comment on specific guidelines – comments are considered when the standards are reviewed and updated.
On the other hand, MISRA is a set of C and C++ coding standards developed and maintained by the Motor Industry Software Reliability Association (MISRA). It is primarily considered the de-facto coding standard for embedded industries.
MISRA was created and is updated by working groups according to predetermined blueprints. While secure and reliable, it is not available for free, though it admits some community feedback when implementing updates.
Naturally, CERT is easier to work with. But open standards change quickly, making them hard to keep up with.
However, closed standards like MISRA are better for safety-critical industries because they enforce uniformity across teams, organizations, and vendors.
How Code Quality help follow Coding Standards & Best Practices
Code quality plays a pivotal role in adhering to coding standards and best practices. Here’s why it matters:

High-quality code follows consistent naming conventions, indentation, and formatting.
Well-structured code reduces the likelihood of introducing bugs or security vulnerabilities.
When everyone follows coding standards, collaboration becomes smoother.
Clean code is more maintainable over time.
Refactoring becomes less daunting when code quality is high.
Try BrowserStack Code Quality Now

Steps to test code quality using the BrowserStack Code Quality Management tool:

Step 1. Sign up for BrowserStack.

Step 2. Configure project settings.

Step 3. Upload or connect your codebase.

Test Coding Standards with BrowserStack Code Quality Tool

Step 4. Review analysis reports.

Review Code Quality Analysis Report follow Coding Best Practices

Conclusion
Adhering to coding standards and best practices significantly impacts code quality, collaboration, and maintainability. By choosing meaningful names, using comments effectively, and planning for future enhancements, developers can create robust, readable code.

Tools like BrowserStack’s Code Quality Management further streamline the process, ensuring consistent excellence in software development.

Having a set of coding standards makes keeping the code clear and easy to collaborate. Of course, norms vary by application, nature, industry, project, developer skillset, and multiple factors. But generally, the coding standards and coding best practices described in this article will help developers and testers establish easy workflows and eliminate unnecessary grunt work.

Tags
Automation Testing Manual Testing
On This Page

Purpose of having Coding Standards
Coding Best Practices & Guidelines to Follow
1. Choose Industry-Specific Coding Standards
2. Focus on Code readability
3. Meaningful Names
4. Avoid using a Single Identifier for multiple purposes
5. Add Comments and Prioritize Documentation
6. Efficient Data Processing
7. Effective Version Control and Collaboration
8. Effective Code Review and Refactoring
9. Try to formalize Exception Handling
10. Security and Privacy Considerations
11. Standardize Headers for Different Modules
12. Turn Daily Backups into an instinct
13. When choosing standards, think Closed vs. Open
How Code Quality help follow Coding Standards & Best Practices
66,000+ Views
Related Guides

Code Coverage Techniques and Tools
Understand code coverage techniques, its importance, types, top tools, and how it enhances software ...

November 21, 2024 16 min read

Configuration as Code: Everything to Know
If you manage your digital assets as a team, learn why implementing Configuration as Code can help y...

January 19, 2023 10 min read

How can Code Review help with Quality Assurance?
Are you looking for ways to improve your quality assurance process? Code review is a great way to do...

August 25, 2022 8 min read
View all guides


Need your Code to meet Coding Standards?
Try BrowserStack Code Quality to meet the Coding Standards of your program for a seamless and error-free execution experience

Contact Sales
PRODUCTS

Live
Automate
Automate TurboScale
Percy
App Live
App Automate
App Percy
Test Management
Test Observability
Accessibility Testing
Accessibility Automation
App Accessibility Testing
Low Code Automation
Bug Capture
WHY BROWSERSTACK

Customers
Case Studies
Browsers & Devices
Enterprise
Data Centers
Real Device Features
Security
RESOURCES

Support
Status
Release Notes
Blog
Events
Meetups
Champions
Guide
Partners
Find a partner
Trust Center
Test University (Beta)
COMPANY

About Us
Careers
Open Source
Press
Newsletter
BrowserStack Logo
Social

Contact Us
More Resources

Cross Browser Testing
Selenium
Test Management
Emulators vs Real Device
Mobile App Testing
Test on Devices

Test on iPhone
Test on iPad
Test on Galaxy
Test In IE
Test on Android
Test on iOS
Test on Right Devices
Mobile Emulators
Tools

SpeedLab
Screenshots
Responsive
Nightwatch.js
© 2025 BrowserStack. All rights reserved.

Terms of Service
Privacy Policy
Cookie Policy
Cookie Preferences
Sitemap
Beta
0 / 10
used queries
1


WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Contents hide
(Top)
Software quality
Prerequisites

Life cycle
Requirements
Architecture
Design
Choice of programming language(s)
Coding standards

Commenting
Naming conventions
Keep the code simple
Portability
Scalability
Reusability
Construction guidelines in brief
Code development

Code building
Testing
Debugging the code and correcting errors
Deployment
See also
Notes
References
External links
Coding best practices

Article
Talk
Read
Edit
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color (beta)

Automatic

Light

Dark
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these messages)
This article includes a list of general references, but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations. (July 2012)
This article's tone or style may not reflect the encyclopedic tone used on Wikipedia. (March 2008)
Coding best practices or programming best practices are a set of informal, sometimes personal, rules (best practices) that many software developers, in computer programming follow to improve software quality.[1] Many computer programs require being robust and reliable for long periods of time,[2] so any rules need to facilitate both initial development and subsequent maintenance of source code by people other than the original authors.

In the ninety–ninety rule, Tom Cargill explains why programming projects often run late: "The first 90% of the code takes the first 90% of the development time. The last 10% takes another 90% of the time."[3] Any guidance which can redress this lack of foresight is worth considering.

The size of a project or program has a significant effect on error rates, programmer productivity, and the amount of management needed.[4]

Software quality
Main article: Software quality
As listed below, there are many attributes associated with good software. Some of these can be mutually contradictory (e.g. being very fast versus performing extensive error checking), and different customers and participants may have different priorities. Weinberg provides an example of how different goals can have a dramatic effect on both effort required and efficiency.[5] Furthermore, he notes that programmers will generally aim to achieve any explicit goals which may be set, probably at the expense of any other quality attributes.

Sommerville has identified four generalized attributes which are not concerned with what a program does, but how well the program does it: Maintainability, dependability, efficiency and usability.[6]

Weinberg has identified four targets which a good program should meet:[7]

Does a program meet its specification ("correct output for each possible input")?
Is the program produced on schedule (and within budget)?
How adaptable is the program to cope with changing requirements?
Is the program efficient enough for the environment in which it is used?
Hoare has identified seventeen objectives related to software quality, including:[8]

Clear definition of purpose.
Simplicity of use.
Ruggedness (difficult to misuse, kind to errors).
Early availability (delivered on time when needed).
Reliability.
Extensibility in the light of experience.
Brevity.
Efficiency (fast enough for the purpose to which it is put).
Minimum cost to develop.
Conformity to any relevant standards (including programming language-specific standards).
Clear, accurate and precise user documents.
Prerequisites
Before coding starts, it is important to ensure that all necessary prerequisites have been completed (or have at least progressed far enough to provide a solid foundation for coding). If the various prerequisites are not satisfied, then the software is likely to be unsatisfactory, even if it is completed.

From Meek & Heath: "What happens before one gets to the coding stage is often of crucial importance to the success of the project."[9]

The prerequisites outlined below cover such matters as:

How is the development structured? (life cycle)
What is the software meant to do? (requirements)
What is the overall structure of the software system? (architecture)
What is the detailed design of individual components? (design)
What is the choice of programming language(s)?
For small simple projects it may be feasible to combine architecture with design and adopt a very simple life cycle.

Life cycle
Main article: Software development methodology
A software development methodology is a framework that is used to structure, plan, and control the life cycle of a software product. Common methodologies include waterfall, prototyping, iterative and incremental development, spiral development, agile software development, rapid application development, and extreme programming.

The waterfall model is a sequential development approach; in particular, it assumes that the requirements can be completely defined at the start of a project. However, McConnell quotes three studies that indicate that, on average, requirements change by around 25% during a project.[10] The other methodologies mentioned above all attempt to reduce the impact of such requirement changes, often by some form of step-wise, incremental, or iterative approach. Different methodologies may be appropriate for different development environments.

Since its introduction in 2001, agile software development has grown in popularity, fueled by software developers seeking a more iterative, collaborative approach to software development.[11]

Requirements
Main article: Requirements engineering
McConnell states: "The first prerequisite you need to fulfill before beginning construction is a clear statement of the problem the system is supposed to solve."[12]

Meek and Heath emphasise that a clear, complete, precise, and unambiguous written specification is the target to aim for.[13] Note that it may not be possible to achieve this target, and the target is likely to change anyway (as mentioned in the previous section).

Sommerville distinguishes between less detailed user requirements and more detailed system requirements.[14] He also distinguishes between functional requirements (e.g. update a record) and non-functional requirements (e.g. response time must be less than 1 second).

Architecture
Main article: Software architecture
Hoare points out: "there are two ways of constructing a software design: one way is to make it so simple that there are obviously no deficiencies; the other way is to make it so complicated that there are no obvious deficiencies. The first method is far more difficult."[15]

Software architecture is concerned with deciding what has to be done and which program component is going to do it (how something is done is left to the detailed design phase below). This is particularly important when a software system contains more than one program since it effectively defines the interface between these various programs. It should include some consideration of any user interfaces as well, without going into excessive detail.

Any non-functional system requirements (response time, reliability, maintainability, etc.) need to be considered at this stage.[16]

The software architecture is also of interest to various stakeholders (sponsors, end-users, etc.) since it gives them a chance to check that their requirements can be met.

Design
Main article: Software design
The primary purpose of design is to fill in the details which have been glossed over in the architectural design. The intention is that the design should be detailed enough to provide a good guide for actual coding, including details of any particular algorithms to be used. For example, at the architectural level, it may have been noted that some data has to be sorted, while at the design level, it is necessary to decide which sorting algorithm is to be used. As a further example, if an object-oriented approach is being used, then the details of the objects must be determined (attributes and methods).

Choice of programming language(s)
Mayer states: "No programming language is perfect. There is not even a single best language; there are only languages well suited or perhaps poorly suited for particular purposes. Understanding the problem and associated programming requirements is necessary for choosing the language best suited for the solution."[17]

From Meek & Heath: "The essence of the art of choosing a language is to start with the problem, decide what its requirements are, and their relative importance since it will probably be impossible to satisfy them all equally well. The available languages should then be measured against the list of requirements, and the most suitable (or least unsatisfactory) chosen."[18]

It is possible that different programming languages may be appropriate for different aspects of the problem. If the languages or their compilers permit, it may be feasible to mix routines written in different languages within the same program.

Even if there is no choice as to which programming language is to be used, McConnell provides some advice: "Every programming language has strengths and weaknesses. Be aware of the specific strengths and weaknesses of the language you're using."[19]

Coding standards
Main article: Coding conventions
This section is also really a prerequisite to coding, as McConnell points out: "Establish programming conventions before you begin programming. It's nearly impossible to change code to match them later."[19]

As listed near the end of coding conventions, there are different conventions for different programming languages, so it may be counterproductive to apply the same conventions across different languages. It is important to note that there is no one particular coding convention for any programming language. Every organization has a custom coding standard for each type of software project. It is, therefore, imperative that the programmer chooses or makes up a particular set of coding guidelines before the software project commences. Some coding conventions are generic, which may not apply for every software project written with a particular programming language.

The use of coding conventions is particularly important when a project involves more than one programmer (there have been projects with thousands of programmers). It is much easier for a programmer to read code written by someone else if all code follows the same conventions.

For some examples of bad coding conventions, Roedy Green provides a lengthy (tongue-in-cheek) article on how to produce unmaintainable code.[20]

Commenting
Due to time restrictions or enthusiastic programmers who want immediate results for their code, commenting of code often takes a back seat. Programmers working as a team have found it better to leave comments behind since coding usually follows cycles, or more than one person may work on a particular module. However, some commenting can decrease the cost of knowledge transfer between developers working on the same module.

In the early days of computing, one commenting practice was to leave a brief description of the following:

Name of the module
Purpose of the Module
Description of the Module
Original Author
Modifications
Authors who modified code with a description on why it was modified.
The "description of the module" should be as brief as possible but without sacrificing clarity and comprehensiveness.

However, the last two items have largely been obsoleted by the advent of revision control systems. Modifications and their authorship can be reliably tracked by using such tools rather than by using comments.

Also, if complicated logic is being used, it is a good practice to leave a comment "block" near that part so that another programmer can understand what exactly is happening.

Unit testing can be another way to show how code is intended to be used.

Naming conventions
See also: Hungarian notation
Use of proper naming conventions is considered good practice. Sometimes programmers tend to use X1, Y1, etc. as variables and forget to replace them with meaningful ones, causing confusion.

It is usually considered good practice to use descriptive names.

Example: A variable for taking in weight as a parameter for a truck can be named TrkWeight, TruckWeightKilograms or Truck_Weight_Kilograms, with TruckWeightKilograms (See Pascal case naming of variables) often being the preferable one since it is instantly recognizable, but naming convention is not always consistent between projects and/or companies.

Keep the code simple
The code that a programmer writes should be simple. Complicated logic for achieving a simple thing should be kept to a minimum since the code might be modified by another programmer in the future. The logic one programmer implemented may not make perfect sense to another. So, always keep the code as simple as possible.[21]

Portability
Program code should not contain "hard-coded" (literal) values referring to environmental parameters, such as absolute file paths, file names, user names, host names, IP addresses, and URLs, UDP/TCP ports. Otherwise, the application will not run on a host that has a different design than anticipated. A careful programmer can parametrize such variables and configure them for the hosting environment outside of the application proper (for example, in property files, on an application server, or even in a database). Compare the mantra of a "single point of definition".[22](SPOD).

As an extension, resources such as XML files should also contain variables rather than literal values, otherwise, the application will not be portable to another environment without editing the XML files. For example, with J2EE applications running in an application server, such environmental parameters can be defined in the scope of the JVM, and the application should get the values from there.

Scalability
Design code with scalability as a design goal because very often in software projects, new features are always added to a project which becomes bigger. Therefore, the facility to add new features to a software code base becomes an invaluable method in writing software.

Reusability
Re-use is a very important design goal in software development. Re-use cuts development costs and also reduces the time for development if the components or modules which are reused are already tested. Very often, software projects start with an existing baseline that contains the project in its prior version and depending on the project, many of existing software modules and components are reused, which reduces development and testing time, therefore, increasing the probability of delivering a software project on schedule.

Construction guidelines in brief
A general overview of all of the above:

Know what the code block must perform
Maintain naming conventions which are uniform throughout.
Indicate a brief description of what a variable is for (reference to commenting)
Correct errors as they occur.
Keep your code simple
Design code with scalability and reuse in mind.
Code development
Code building
A best practice for building code involves daily builds and testing, or better still continuous integration, or even continuous delivery.

Testing
Main article: Software testing
Testing is an integral part of software development that needs to be planned. It is also important that testing is done proactively; meaning that test cases are planned before coding starts, and test cases are developed while the application is being designed and coded.

Debugging the code and correcting errors
Programmers tend to write the complete code and then begin debugging and checking for errors. Though this approach can save time in smaller projects, bigger and more complex ones tend to have too many variables and functions that need attention. Therefore, it is good to debug every module once you are done and not the entire program. This saves time in the long run so that one does not end up wasting a lot of time on figuring out what is wrong. unit tests for individual modules and/or functional tests for web services and web applications can help with this.

Deployment
Main articles: Software deployment and Deployment environment
Deployment is the final stage of releasing an application for users. Some best practices are:[23][24]

Keep the installation structure simple: Files and directories should be kept to a minimum. Don’t install anything that’s never going to be used.
Keep only what is needed: The software configuration management activities must make sure this is enforced. Unused resources (old or failed versions of files, source code, interfaces, etc.) must be archived somewhere else to keep newer builds lean.
Keep everything updated: The software configuration management activities must make sure this is enforced. For delta-based deployments, make sure the versions of the resources that are already deployed are the latest before deploying the deltas. If not sure, perform a deployment from scratch (delete everything first and then re-deploy).
Adopt a multi-stage strategy: Depending on the size of the project, sometimes more deployments are needed.[25]
Have a roll back strategy: There must be a way to roll-back to a previous (working) version.
Rely on automation for repeatable processes: There's far too much room for human error, deployments should not be manual. Use a tool that is native to each operating system or, use a scripting language for cross-platform deployments.[26][27]
Re-create the real deployment environment: Consider everything (routers, firewalls, web servers, web browsers, file systems, etc.)
Do not change deployment procedures and scripts on-the-fly and, document such changes: Wait for a new iteration and record such changes appropriately.
Customize deployment: Newer software products such as APIs, micro-services, etc. require specific considerations for successful deployment.[28][29][30]
Reduce risk from other development phases: If other activities such as testing and configuration management are wrong, deployment surely will fail.[31][32]
Consider the influence each stakeholder has: Organizational, social, governmental considerations.[33][34][35]
See also
Best practice
List of tools for static code analysis
Motor Industry Software Reliability Association (MISRA)
Software Assurance
Software quality
List of software development philosophies
The Cathedral and the Bazaar - book comparing top-down vs. bottom-up open-source software
Davis 201 Principles of Software Development[36]
Where's the Theory for Software Engineering?[37]
Don't Make Me Think (Principles of intuitive navigation and information design)[38]
Notes
References
 McConnell, Steve (2004). Code Complete. Redmond, Wash.: Microsoft Press. p. [page needed]. ISBN 978-0-7356-9125-4. OCLC 61315783.
 Sommerville, Ian (2004). Software Engineering (Seventh ed.). Pearson. p. 38. ISBN 0-321-21026-3.
 Bentley, Jon (1985). "Programming pearls: Bumper-Sticker Computer Science". Communications of the ACM. 28 (9): 896–901. doi:10.1145/4284.315122. ISSN 0001-0782. S2CID 5832776.
 McConnell, Steve (2004). Code Complete (Second ed.). Microsoft Press. pp. 649–659. ISBN 0-7356-1967-0.
 Weinberg, Gerald (1998). The Psychology of Computer Programming (Silver anniversary ed.). Dorset House Publishing, New York. pp. 128–132. ISBN 978-0-932633-42-2.
 Sommerville, Ian (2004). Software Engineering (Seventh ed.). Pearson. pp. 12–13. ISBN 0-321-21026-3.
 Weinberg, Gerald (1998). The Psychology of Computer Programming (Silver anniversary ed.). Dorset House Publishing, New York. pp. 15–25. ISBN 978-0-932633-42-2.
 Hoare, C.A.R. (1972). "The Quality of Software". Software: Practice and Experience. 2 (2). Wiley: 103–105. doi:10.1002/spe.4380020202.
 Meek, Brian; Heath, Patricia (1980), Guide to Good Programming Practice, Ellis Horwood, Wiley, p. 14
 McConnell, Steve (2004). Code Complete (Second ed.). Microsoft Press. p. 40. ISBN 0-7356-1967-0.
 Sacolick, Isaac (April 8, 2022). "A brief history of the agile methodology". Infoworld. Retrieved February 6, 2023.
 McConnell, Steve (2004). Code Complete (Second ed.). Microsoft Press. p. 36. ISBN 0-7356-1967-0.
 Meek, Brian; Heath, Patricia (1980), Guide to Good Programming Practice, Ellis Horwood, Wiley, p. 15
 Sommerville, Ian (2004). Software Engineering (Seventh ed.). Pearson. pp. 118–123. ISBN 0-321-21026-3.
 Hoare, C.A.R (1981). "The Emperor's Old Clothes" (PDF). Communications of the ACM. 24 (2). ACM: 75–83. doi:10.1145/358549.358561. S2CID 97895. Retrieved 25 Nov 2019.
 Sommerville, Ian (2004). Software Engineering (Seventh ed.). Pearson. pp. 242–243. ISBN 0-321-21026-3.
 Mayer, Herbert (1989). Advanced C programming on the IBM PC. Windcrest Books. p. xii (preface). ISBN 0830693637.
 Meek, Brian; Heath, Patricia (1980), Guide to Good Programming Practice, Ellis Horwood, Wiley, p. 37
 McConnell, Steve (2004). Code Complete (Second ed.). Microsoft Press. p. 70. ISBN 0-7356-1967-0.
 Roedy Green. "unmaintainable code : Java Glossary". Retrieved 2013-11-26.
 Multiple (wiki). "Best practices". Docforge. Retrieved 2012-11-13.
 "Single-Point-of-Definition by Example". Retrieved 2015-11-30. 'Don't repeat anything. Aim for a Single Point of Definition for every aspect of your application [...]'.
 "7 Application Deployment Best Practices - Done Devops". dzone.com.
 "The seven deadly sins of software deployment [LWN.net]". lwn.net.
 blog.fortrabbit.com/multi-stage-deployment-for-website-development
 Cruz, Victor (April 3, 2013). "Why 30% of App Deployments fail". Wired – via www.wired.com.
 "The rules of software deployment". Archived from the original on 2010-05-13.
 "Tools You Need to Speed Up Deployment to Match Demand". February 3, 2017.
 Ankerholz, Amber (September 14, 2016). "DevOps and the Art of Secure Application Deployment".
 "Organizing Software Deployments to Match Failure Conditions". Amazon Web Services. May 5, 2014.
 "Best Practices for Risk-Free Deployment". TheServerSide.com.
 Ambler, Scott. "Effective Software Deployment". Dr. Dobb's.
 "Enterprise application deployment: The humanity of software implementation". Archived from the original on 2016-08-21.
 "Hacking bureaucracy: improving hiring and software deployment | 18F: Digital service delivery". 18f.gsa.gov. 14 May 2014.
 "A Bad Software Deployment Is Worse Than Doing Nothing". Intact Technology. June 1, 2016.
 Davis, Alan Mark. (1995). 201 principles of software development. New York: McGraw-Hill. ISBN 0-07-015840-1. OCLC 31814837.
 Johnson, Pontus; Ekstedt, Mathias; Jacobson, Ivar (2012). "Where's the Theory for Software Engineering?". IEEE Software. 29 (5): 96. doi:10.1109/MS.2012.127. ISSN 0740-7459. S2CID 38239662.
 Krug, Steve (2014). Don't make me think, revisited : a common sense approach to Web usability. Bayle, Elisabeth,, Straiger, Aren,, Matcho, Mark (Third ed.). [San Francisco, California]. ISBN 978-0-321-96551-6. OCLC 859556499.
Harbison, Samuel P.; Steele, Guy L. (2002). C - A Reference Manual. ISBN 978-0-13-089592-9.
Enhancing the Development Life Cycle to Product Secure Software, V2.0 Oct. 2008 describes the security principles and practices that software developers, testers, and integrators can adopt to achieve the twin objectives of producing more secure software-intensive systems, and verifying the security of the software they produce.
Dutta, Shiv; Hook, Gary (June 26, 2003). "Best practices for programming in C". developerWorks. IBM. Archived from the original on July 13, 2009. Retrieved January 21, 2010.
External links
Paul Burden, co-author of the MISRA C Coding Standards and PRQA's representative on the MISRA C working group for more than 10 years discusses a common coding standard fallacy: "we don't need a coding standard!, we just need to catch bugs!"
Categories: Software development processComputer programming
This page was last edited on 6 June 2024, at 17:52 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia FoundationPowered by MediaWiki
Beta
0 / 10
used queries
1
Search
    Search 11,500+ tutorials
freeCodeCamp.org
Forum Donate
Learn to code — free 3,000-hour curriculum

May 15, 2023
/
#best practices
How to Write Clean Code – Tips and Best Practices (Full Handbook)
German Cocca
German Cocca
How to Write Clean Code – Tips and Best Practices (Full Handbook)
Hi everyone! In this handbook we're going to talk about writing "clean" code. It's a topic that used to confuse me a bit when I was starting out as a programmer, and I find that it has many nuances and possible interpretations.

So in this article we'll talk about what the term "clean code" means, why it's important, how can we assess whether a codebase is clean or not. You'll also learn some best practices and conventions you can follow to make your code cleaner.

Let's go!

Table of Contents
What does it mean to write "clean code" and why should I care?

How can I assess whether a codebase is clean or not?

Tips and conventions to write cleaner code

Effectiveness, efficiency and simplicity

Format and syntax

Naming

Conciseness versus clarity

Re-usability

Clear flow of execution

Single responsibility principle

Having a "single source of truth"

Only expose and consume information you need

Modularization

Folder structures

Documentation

Wrapping up

What Does it Mean to Write "Clean Code" and Why Should I Care?
Clean code is a term used to describe computer code that is easy to read, understand, and maintain. Clean code is written in a way that makes it simple, concise, and expressive. It follows a set of conventions, standards, and practices that make it easy to read and follow.

Clean code is free from complexity, redundancy, and other code smells and anti-patterns that can make it difficult to maintain, debug, and modify.

I can't overstate the importance of clean code. When code is easy to read and understand, it makes it easier for developers to work on the codebase. This can lead to increased productivity and reduced errors.

Also, when code is easy to maintain, it ensures that the codebase can be improved and updated over time. This is especially important for long-term projects where code must be maintained and updated for years to come.

How Can I Assess Whether a Codebase is Clean or Not?
You can assess clean code in a variety of ways. Good documentation, consistent formatting, and a well-organized codebase are all indicators of clean code.

Code reviews can also help to identify potential issues and ensure that code follows best practices and conventions.

Testing is also an important aspect of clean code. It helps to ensure that code is functioning as expected and can catch errors early.

There are several tools, practices, and conventions you can implement to ensure a clean codebase. By implementing these tools and practices, developers can create a codebase that is easy to read, understand, and maintain.

It's also important to remember that there's an inevitable amount of subjectivity related to this topic, and there are a number of different opinions and tips out there. What might look clean and awesome for one person or one project might not be so for another person or another project.

But still there are a few general conventions we can follow to achieve cleaner code, so let's jump into that now.

Tips and Conventions to Write Cleaner Code
Effectiveness, Efficiency and Simplicity
Whenever I need to think about how to implement a new feature into an already existing codebase, or how to tackle the solution of a specific problem, I always prioritize this three simple things.

Effectiveness
First, our code should be effective, meaning it should solve the problem it's supposed to solve. Of course this is the most basic expectation we could have for our code, but if our implementation doesn't actually work, it's worthless to think about any other thing.

Efficiency
Second, once we know our code solves the problem, we should check if it does so efficiently. Does the program run using a reasonable amount of resources in terms of time and space? Can it run faster and with less space?

Algorithmic complexity is something you should be aware of in order to evaluate this. If you're not familiar with it, you can check this article I wrote.

To expand upon efficiency, here are two examples of a function that calculates the sum of all numbers in an array.

// Inefficient Example
function sumArrayInefficient(array) {
  let sum = 0;
  for (let i = 0; i < array.length; i++) {
    sum += array[i];
  }
  return sum;
}
This implementation of the sumArrayInefficient function iterates over the array using a for loop and adds each element to the sum variable. This is a valid solution, but it is not very efficient because it requires iterating over the entire array, regardless of its length.

// Efficient example
function sumArrayEfficient(array) {
  return array.reduce((a, b) => a + b, 0);
}
This implementation of the sumArrayEfficient function uses the reduce method to sum the elements of the array. The reduce method applies a function to each element of the array and accumulates the result. In this case, the function simply adds each element to the accumulator, which starts at 0.

This is a more efficient solution because it only requires a single iteration over the array and performs the summing operation on each element as it goes.

Simplicity
And last comes simplicity. This is the toughest one to evaluate because its subjective, it depends on the person who reads the code. But some guidelines we can follow are:

Can you easily understand what the program does at each line?

Do functions and variables have names that clearly represent their responsibilities?

Is the code indented correctly and spaced with the same format all along the codebase?

Is there any documentation available for the code? Are comments used to explain complex parts of the program?

How quick can you identify in which part of the codebase are certain features of the program? Can you delete/add new features without the need of modifying many other parts of the code?

Does the code follow a modular approach, with different features separated in components?

Is code reused when possible?

Are the same architecture, design, and implementation decisions followed equally all along the codebase?

By following and prioritizing these three concepts of effectiveness, efficiency, and simplicity, we can always have a guideline to follow when thinking about how to implement a solution. Now let's expand upon some of the guidelines that can help us simplify our code.

Format and Syntax
Using consistent formatting and syntax throughout a codebase is an important aspect of writing clean code. This is because consistent formatting and syntax make the code more readable and easier to understand.

When code is consistent, developers can easily identify patterns and understand how the code works, which makes it easier to debug, maintain, and update the codebase over time. Consistency also helps to reduce errors, as it ensures that all developers are following the same standards and conventions.

Some of the things we should think about regarding format and syntax are:

Indentation and spacing
// bad indentation and spacing
const myFunc=(number1,number2)=>{
const result=number1+number2;
return result;
}

// good indentation and spacing
const myFunc = (number1, number2) => {
    const result = number1 + number2
    return result
}
Here we have an example of a same function, one done with no indentation and spacing, and the other properly spaced and indented. We can see that the second one is clearly easier to read.

Consistent syntax
// Arrow function, no colons, no return
const multiplyByTwo = number => number * 2

// Function, colons, return
function multiplyByThree(number) {
    return number * 3;
}
Again, here we have very similar functions implemented with different syntax. The first one is an arrow function, with no colons and no return, while the other is a common function that uses colons and a return.

Both work and are just fine, but we should aim to always use the same syntax for similar operations, as it becomes more even and readable along the codebase.

Linterns and code formatters are great tools we can use in our projects to automatize the syntax and formatting conventions in our codebase. If you're not familiar with this tools, check out this other article of mine.

Consistent case conventions
// camelCase
const myName = 'John'
// PascalCase
const MyName = 'John'
// snake_case
const my_name = 'John'
Same goes for the case convention we choose to follow. All of these work, but we should aim to consistently use the same one all through our project.

Naming
Naming variables and functions clearly and descriptively is an important aspect of writing clean code. It helps to improve the readability and maintainability of the codebase. When names are well-chosen, other developers can quickly understand what the variable or function is doing, and how it is related to the rest of the code.

Here are two examples in JavaScript that demonstrate the importance of clear and descriptive naming:

// Example 1: Poor Naming
function ab(a, b) {
  let x = 10;
  let y = a + b + x;
  console.log(y);
}

ab(5, 3);
In this example, we have a function that takes two parameters, adds them to a hardcoded value of 10, and logs the result to the console. The function name and variable names are poorly chosen and don't give any indication of what the function does or what the variables represent.

// Example 1: Good Naming
function calculateTotalWithTax(basePrice, taxRate) {
  const BASE_TAX = 10;
  const totalWithTax = basePrice + (basePrice * (taxRate / 100)) + BASE_TAX;
  console.log(totalWithTax);
}

calculateTotalWithTax(50, 20);
In this example, we have a function that calculates the total price of a product including tax. The function name and variable names are well-chosen and give a clear indication of what the function does and what the variables represent.

This makes the code easier to read and understand, especially for other developers who may be working with the codebase in the future.

Conciseness vs Clarity
When it comes to writing clean code, it's important to strike a balance between conciseness and clarity. While it's important to keep code concise to improve its readability and maintainability, it's equally important to ensure that the code is clear and easy to understand. Writing overly concise code can lead to confusion and errors, and can make the code difficult to work with for other developers.

Here are two examples that demonstrate the importance of conciseness and clarity:

// Example 1: Concise function
const countVowels = s => (s.match(/[aeiou]/gi) || []).length;
console.log(countVowels("hello world"));
This example uses a concise arrow function and regex to count the number of vowels in a given string. While the code is very short and easy to write, it may not be immediately clear to other developers how the regex pattern works, especially if they are not familiar with regex syntax.

// Example 2: More verbose and clearer function
function countVowels(s) {
  const vowelRegex = /[aeiou]/gi;
  const matches = s.match(vowelRegex) || [];
  return matches.length;
}

console.log(countVowels("hello world"));
This example uses a traditional function and regex to count the number of vowels in a given string, but does so in a way that is clear and easy to understand. The function name and variable names are descriptive, and the regex pattern is stored in a variable with a clear name. This makes it easy to see what the function is doing and how it works.

It's important to strike a balance between conciseness and clarity when writing code. While concise code can improve readability and maintainability, it's important to ensure that the code is still clear and easy to understand for other developers who may be working with the codebase in the future.

By using descriptive function and variable names, and making use of clear and readable code formatting and comments, it's possible to write clean and concise code that is easy to understand and work with.

Reusability
Code reusability is a fundamental concept in software engineering that refers to the ability of code to be used multiple times without modification.

The importance of code reusability lies in the fact that it can greatly improve the efficiency and productivity of software development by reducing the amount of code that needs to be written and tested.

By reusing existing code, developers can save time and effort, improve code quality and consistency, and minimize the risk of introducing bugs and errors. Reusable code also allows for more modular and scalable software architectures, making it easier to maintain and update codebases over time.

// Example 1: No re-usability
function calculateCircleArea(radius) {
  const PI = 3.14;
  return PI * radius * radius;
}

function calculateRectangleArea(length, width) {
  return length * width;
}

function calculateTriangleArea(base, height) {
  return (base * height) / 2;
}

const circleArea = calculateCircleArea(5);
const rectangleArea = calculateRectangleArea(4, 6);
const triangleArea = calculateTriangleArea(3, 7);

console.log(circleArea, rectangleArea, triangleArea);
This example defines three functions that calculate the area of a circle, rectangle, and triangle, respectively. Each function performs a specific task, but none of them are reusable for other similar tasks.

Additionally, the use of a hard-coded PI value can lead to errors if the value needs to be changed in the future. The code is inefficient since it repeats the same logic multiple times.

// Example 2: Implementing re-usability
function calculateArea(shape, ...args) {
  if (shape === 'circle') {
    const [radius] = args;
    const PI = 3.14;
    return PI * radius * radius;
  } else if (shape === 'rectangle') {
    const [length, width] = args;
    return length * width;
  } else if (shape === 'triangle') {
    const [base, height] = args;
    return (base * height) / 2;
  } else {
    throw new Error(`Shape "${shape}" not supported.`);
  }
}

const circleArea = calculateArea('circle', 5);
const rectangleArea = calculateArea('rectangle', 4, 6);
const triangleArea = calculateArea('triangle', 3, 7);

console.log(circleArea, rectangleArea, triangleArea);
This example defines a single function calculateArea that takes a shape argument and a variable number of arguments. Based on the shape argument, the function performs the appropriate calculation and returns the result.

This approach is much more efficient since it eliminates the need to repeat code for similar tasks. It is also more flexible and extensible, as additional shapes can easily be added in the future.

Clear Flow of Execution
Having a clear flow of execution is essential for writing clean code because it makes the code easier to read, understand, and maintain. Code that follows a clear and logical structure is less prone to errors, easier to modify and extend, and more efficient in terms of time and resources.

On the other hand, spaghetti code is a term used to describe code that is convoluted and difficult to follow, often characterized by long, tangled, and unorganized code blocks. Spaghetti code can be a result of poor design decisions, excessive coupling, or lack of proper documentation and commenting.

Here are two examples of JavaScript code that perform the same task, one with a clear flow of execution, and the other with spaghetti code:

// Example 1: Clear flow of execution
function calculateDiscount(price, discountPercentage) {
  const discountAmount = price * (discountPercentage / 100);
  const discountedPrice = price - discountAmount;
  return discountedPrice;
}

const originalPrice = 100;
const discountPercentage = 20;
const finalPrice = calculateDiscount(originalPrice, discountPercentage);

console.log(finalPrice);

// Example 2: Spaghetti code
const originalPrice = 100;
const discountPercentage = 20;

let discountedPrice;
let discountAmount;
if (originalPrice && discountPercentage) {
  discountAmount = originalPrice * (discountPercentage / 100);
  discountedPrice = originalPrice - discountAmount;
}

if (discountedPrice) {
  console.log(discountedPrice);
}
As we can see, example 1 follows a clear and logical structure, with a function that takes in the necessary parameters and returns the calculated result. On the other hand, example 2 is much more convoluted, with variables declared outside of any function and multiple if statements used to check if the code block has executed successfully.

Single Responsibility Principle
The Single Responsibility Principle (SRP) is a principle in software development that states that each class or module should have only one reason to change, or in other words, each entity in our codebase should have a single responsibility.

This principle helps to create code that is easy to understand, maintain, and extend.

By applying SRP, we can create code that is easier to test, reuse, and refactor, since each module only handles a single responsibility. This makes it less likely to have side effects or dependencies that can make the code harder to work with.

// Example 1: Withouth SRP
function processOrder(order) {
  // validate order
  if (order.items.length === 0) {
    console.log("Error: Order has no items");
    return;
  }

  // calculate total
  let total = 0;
  order.items.forEach(item => {
    total += item.price * item.quantity;
  });

  // apply discounts
  if (order.customer === "vip") {
    total *= 0.9;
  }

  // save order
  const db = new Database();
  db.connect();
  db.saveOrder(order, total);
}
In this example, the processOrder function handles several responsibilities: it validates the order, calculates the total, applies discounts, and saves the order to a database. This makes the function long and hard to understand, and any changes to one responsibility may affect the others, making it harder to maintain.

// Example 2: With SRP
class OrderProcessor {
  constructor(order) {
    this.order = order;
  }

  validate() {
    if (this.order.items.length === 0) {
      console.log("Error: Order has no items");
      return false;
    }
    return true;
  }

  calculateTotal() {
    let total = 0;
    this.order.items.forEach(item => {
      total += item.price * item.quantity;
    });
    return total;
  }

  applyDiscounts(total) {
    if (this.order.customer === "vip") {
      total *= 0.9;
    }
    return total;
  }
}

class OrderSaver {
  constructor(order, total) {
    this.order = order;
    this.total = total;
  }

  save() {
    const db = new Database();
    db.connect();
    db.saveOrder(this.order, this.total);
  }
}

const order = new Order();
const processor = new OrderProcessor(order);

if (processor.validate()) {
  const total = processor.calculateTotal();
  const totalWithDiscounts = processor.applyDiscounts(total);
  const saver = new OrderSaver(order, totalWithDiscounts);
  saver.save();
}
In this example, the processOrder function has been split into two classes that follow the SRP: OrderProcessor and OrderSaver.

The OrderProcessor class handles the responsibilities of validating the order, calculating the total, and applying discounts, while the OrderSaver class handles the responsibility of saving the order to the database.

This makes the code easier to understand, test, and maintain, since each class has a clear responsibility and can be modified or replaced without affecting the others.

Having a "Single Source of Truth"
Having a "single source of truth" means that there is only one place where a particular piece of data or configuration is stored in the codebase, and any other references to it in the code refer back to that one source. This is important because it ensures that the data is consistent and avoids duplication and inconsistency.

Here's an example to illustrate the concept. Let's say we have an application that needs to display the current weather conditions in a city. We could implement this feature in two different ways:

// Option 1: No "single source of truth"

// file 1: weatherAPI.js
const apiKey = '12345abcde';

function getCurrentWeather(city) {
  return fetch(`https://api.weather.com/conditions/v1/${city}?apiKey=${apiKey}`)
    .then(response => response.json());
}

// file 2: weatherComponent.js
const apiKey = '12345abcde';

function displayCurrentWeather(city) {
  getCurrentWeather(city)
    .then(weatherData => {
      // display weatherData on the UI
    });
}
In this option, the API key is duplicated in two different files, making it harder to maintain and update. If we ever need to change the API key, we have to remember to update it in both places.

// Option 2: "Single source of truth"

// file 1: weatherAPI.js
const apiKey = '12345abcde';

function getCurrentWeather(city) {
  return fetch(`https://api.weather.com/conditions/v1/${city}?apiKey=${apiKey}`)
    .then(response => response.json());
}

export { getCurrentWeather, apiKey };


// file 2: weatherComponent.js
import { getCurrentWeather } from './weatherAPI';

function displayCurrentWeather(city) {
  getCurrentWeather(city)
    .then(weatherData => {
      // display weatherData on the UI
    });
}
In this option, the API key is stored in one place (in the weatherAPI.js file) and exported for other modules to use. This ensures that there is only one source of truth for the API key and avoids duplication and inconsistency.

If we ever need to update the API key, we can do it in one place and all other modules that use it will automatically get the updated value.

Only Expose and Consume Data You Need
One important principle of writing clean code is to only expose and consume the information that is necessary for a particular task. This helps to reduce complexity, increase efficiency, and avoid errors that can arise from using unnecessary data.

When data that is not needed is exposed or consumed, it can lead to performance issues and make the code more difficult to understand and maintain.

Suppose you have an object with multiple properties, but you only need to use a few of them. One way to do this would be to reference the object and the specific properties every time you need them. But this can become verbose and error-prone, especially if the object is deeply nested. A cleaner and more efficient solution would be to use object destructuring to only expose and consume the information you need.

// Original object
const user = {
  id: 1,
  name: 'Alice',
  email: 'alice@example.com',
  age: 25,
  address: {
    street: '123 Main St',
    city: 'Anytown',
    state: 'CA',
    zip: '12345'
  }
};

// Only expose and consume the name and email properties
const { name, email } = user;

console.log(name); // 'Alice'
console.log(email); // 'alice@example.com'
Modularization
Modularization is an essential concept in writing clean code. It refers to the practice of breaking down large, complex code into smaller, more manageable modules or functions. This makes the code easier to understand, test, and maintain.

Using modularization provides several benefits such as:

Re-usability: Modules can be reused in different parts of the application or in other applications, saving time and effort in development.

Encapsulation: Modules allow you to hide the internal details of a function or object, exposing only the essential interface to the outside world. This helps to reduce coupling between different parts of the code and improve overall code quality.

Scalability: By breaking down large code into smaller, modular pieces, you can easily add or remove functionality without affecting the entire codebase.

Here is an example in JavaScript of a piece of code that performs a simple task, one not using modularization and the other implementing modularization.

// Without modularization
function calculatePrice(quantity, price, tax) {
  let subtotal = quantity * price;
  let total = subtotal + (subtotal * tax);
  return total;
}

// Without modularization
let quantity = parseInt(prompt("Enter quantity: "));
let price = parseFloat(prompt("Enter price: "));
let tax = parseFloat(prompt("Enter tax rate: "));

let total = calculatePrice(quantity, price, tax);
console.log("Total: $" + total.toFixed(2));
In the above example, the calculatePrice function is used to calculate the total price of an item given its quantity, price, and tax rate. However, this function is not modularized and is tightly coupled with the user input and output logic. This can make it difficult to test and maintain.

Now, let's see an example of the same code using modularization:

// With modularization
function calculateSubtotal(quantity, price) {
  return quantity * price;
}

function calculateTotal(subtotal, tax) {
  return subtotal + (subtotal * tax);
}

// With modularization
let quantity = parseInt(prompt("Enter quantity: "));
let price = parseFloat(prompt("Enter price: "));
let tax = parseFloat(prompt("Enter tax rate: "));

let subtotal = calculateSubtotal(quantity, price);
let total = calculateTotal(subtotal, tax);
console.log("Total: $" + total.toFixed(2));
In the above example, the calculatePrice function has been broken down into two smaller functions: calculateSubtotal and calculateTotal. These functions are now modularized and are responsible for calculating the subtotal and total, respectively. This makes the code easier to understand, test, and maintain, and also makes it more reusable in other parts of the application.

Modularization can also refer to the practice of dividing single files of code into many smaller files that are later on compiled back on to a single (or fewer files). This practice has the same benefits we just talked about.

If you'd like to know how to implement this in JavaScript using modules, check out this other article of mine.

Folder Structures
Choosing a good folder structure is an essential part of writing clean code. A well-organized project structure helps developers find and modify code easily, reduces code complexity, and improves project scalability and maintainability.

On the other hand, a poor folder structure can make it challenging to understand the project's architecture, navigate the codebase, and lead to confusion and errors.

Here are examples of a good and a bad folder structure using a React project as an example:

// Bad folder structure
my-app/
├── App.js
├── index.js
├── components/
│   ├── Button.js
│   ├── Card.js
│   └── Navbar.js
├── containers/
│   ├── Home.js
│   ├── Login.js
│   └── Profile.js
├── pages/
│   ├── Home.js
│   ├── Login.js
│   └── Profile.js
└── utilities/
    ├── api.js
    └── helpers.js
In this example, the project structure is organized around file types, such as components, containers, and pages.

But this approach can lead to confusion and duplication, as it's not clear which files belong where. For example, the Home component is present in both the containers and pages folders. It can also make it challenging to find and modify code, as developers may need to navigate multiple folders to find the code they need.

// Good folder structure
my-app/
├── src/
│   ├── components/
│   │   ├── Button/
│   │   │   ├── Button.js
│   │   │   ├── Button.module.css
│   │   │   └── index.js
│   │   ├── Card/
│   │   │   ├── Card.js
│   │   │   ├── Card.module.css
│   │   │   └── index.js
│   │   └── Navbar/
│   │       ├── Navbar.js
│   │       ├── Navbar.module.css
│   │       └── index.js
│   ├── pages/
│   │   ├── Home/
│   │   │   ├── Home.js
│   │   │   ├── Home.module.css
│   │   │   └── index.js
│   │   ├── Login/
│   │   │   ├── Login.js
│   │   │   ├── Login.module.css
│   │   │   └── index.js
│   │   └── Profile/
│   │       ├── Profile.js
│   │       ├── Profile.module.css
│   │       └── index.js
│   ├── utils/
│   │   ├── api.js
│   │   └── helpers.js
│   ├── App.js
│   └── index.js
└── public/
    ├── index.html
    └── favicon.ico
In this example, the project structure is organized around features, such as components, pages, and utils. Each feature has its own folder, which contains all the files related to that feature.

This approach makes it easy to find and modify code, as all the files related to a feature are located in the same folder. It also reduces code duplication and complexity, as features are separated, and their related files are organized together.

Overall, a good folder structure should be organized around features, not file types, and should make it easy to find and modify code. A clear and logical structure can make a project easier to maintain, understand and scale, while a confusing and inconsistent structure can lead to errors and confusion.

If you're interested in learning more about this, in this article I wrote about software architecture I expanded upon the topic of folder structures and well-known patterns you can follow.

Documentation
Documentation is an essential part of writing clean code. Proper documentation not only helps the developer who wrote the code understand it better in the future but also makes it easier for other developers to read and understand the codebase. When code is well-documented, it can save time and effort in debugging and maintaining the code.

Documenting is specially important in cases in which simple and easy to understand solutions can't be implemented, cases when the business logic is quite complex, and cases in which people who are not familiar with the codebase have to interact with it.

One way to document code is by using comments. Comments can provide context and explain what the code is doing. But it's important to use comments wisely, only commenting where necessary and avoiding redundant or unnecessary ones.

Another way to document code is by using inline documentation. Inline documentation is embedded in the code itself and can be used to explain what a specific function or piece of code does. Inline documentation is often used in combination with tools like JSDoc, which provides a standard for documenting code in JavaScript.

Tools like Typescript can also provide automatic documentation for our codebase, which is hugely helpful.

If you'd like to know more about Typescript, I wrote a beginner friendly guide a while ago.

And Lastly, tools like Swagger and Postman can be used to document APIs, providing a way to easily understand how to interact with them

If you're interested in knowing how to fully implement, test, consume and document APIs, I recently wrote two guides for REST APIs and GraphQL APIs.

Wrapping Up
Well everyone, as always, I hope you enjoyed the article and learned something new.

If you want, you can also follow me on LinkedIn or Twitter. See you in the next one!

Image

ADVERTISEMENT

ADVERTISEMENT

ADVERTISEMENT

ADVERTISEMENT

ADVERTISEMENT

ADVERTISEMENT

ADVERTISEMENT

ADVERTISEMENT

ADVERTISEMENT

ADVERTISEMENT

ADVERTISEMENT

ADVERTISEMENT

ADVERTISEMENT

German Cocca
German Cocca
I'm a full stack developer (typescript | react | react native | node | express) and computer science student. In this blog I write about the things I learn along my path to becoming the best developer I can be.

If this article was helpful, share it.

Learn to code for free. freeCodeCamp's open source curriculum has helped more than 40,000 people get jobs as developers. Get started

freeCodeCamp is a donor-supported tax-exempt 501(c)(3) charity organization (United States Federal Tax Identification Number: 82-0779546)

Our mission: to help people learn to code for free. We accomplish this by creating thousands of videos, articles, and interactive coding lessons - all freely available to the public.
Skip to content
DEV Community
Find related posts...
Powered by  Algolia
Log in
Create account

40
Jump to Comments

326
Save

Boost

Cover image for Writing Clean Code: Best Practices and Principles
MFONIDO MARK
MFONIDO MARK
Posted on Sep 17, 2023


257

6

5

6

11
Writing Clean Code: Best Practices and Principles
#
webdev
#
javascript
#
programming
#
productivity
Introduction
Writing clean code is a fundamental skill for every software developer. Clean code not only makes your codebase more maintainable and easier to understand but also fosters collaboration among team members. In this comprehensive article, we will explore what clean code is, why it's important, and provide you with a set of best practices and principles to help you write clean and maintainable code.

What is Clean Code?
Clean code is code that is easy to read, easy to understand, and easy to modify. It is code that is devoid of unnecessary complexity, redundancy, and confusion. Clean code follows a set of conventions and best practices that make it more consistent, making it easier for multiple developers to work on the same project seamlessly.

Why is Clean Code Important?
Readability: Clean code is easy to read, which means that anyone - including your future self - can understand it quickly. This reduces the time required to grasp the code's functionality, leading to faster development and debugging.

Maintainability: Code is read more often than it is written. When you write clean code, it becomes easier to maintain and extend the application over time. This is crucial in the software development lifecycle, where projects often evolve and grow.

Collaboration: Clean code encourages collaboration. When your code is clean and well-organized, other team members can work on it effectively. This makes it easier to divide tasks and work on different parts of the codebase simultaneously.

Bug Reduction: Clean code reduces the likelihood of introducing bugs. Code that is difficult to understand is more prone to errors during modifications or enhancements.

Efficiency: Clean code is efficient code. It typically runs faster and uses fewer resources because it avoids unnecessary operations and complexity.

Now that we understand why clean code is important, let's delve into some best practices and principles to help you write clean code.

Best Practices and Principles for Writing Clean Code
1 . Meaningful Variable and Function Names

Use descriptive names for variables, functions, classes, and other identifiers. A well-chosen name can convey the purpose of the entity, making the code more understandable. Avoid single-letter variable names or cryptic abbreviations.

# Bad variable name
x = 5

# Good variable name
total_score = 5
2 . Keep Functions and Methods Short

Functions and methods should be concise and focused on a single task. The Single Responsibility Principle (SRP) states that a function should do one thing and do it well. Shorter functions are easier to understand, test, and maintain. If a function becomes too long or complex, consider breaking it down into smaller, more manageable functions.

// Long and complex function
function processUserData(user) {
    // Many lines of code...
}

// Refactored into smaller functions
function validateUserInput(userInput) {
    // Validation logic...
}

function saveUserToDatabase(user) {
    // Database operation...
}

3 . Comments and Documentation

Use comments sparingly, and when you do, make them meaningful. Code should be self-explanatory whenever possible. Documentation, such as inline comments and README files, helps other developers understand your code's purpose and usage. Document complex algorithms, non-trivial decisions, and public APIs.

# Bad comment
x = x + 1  # Increment x

# Good comment
# Calculate the total score by incrementing x
total_score = x + 1

4 . Consistent Formatting and Indentation

Adhere to a consistent coding style and indentation. This makes the codebase look clean and organized. Most programming languages have community-accepted coding standards (e.g., PEP 8 for Python, eslint for JavaScript) that you should follow. Consistency also applies to naming conventions, spacing, and code structure.

// Inconsistent formatting
if(condition){
    doSomething();
  } else {
      doSomethingElse();
}

// Consistent formatting
if (condition) {
    doSomething();
} else {
    doSomethingElse();
}

5 . DRY (Don't Repeat Yourself) Principle

Avoid duplicating code. Repeated code is harder to maintain and increases the risk of inconsistencies. Extract common functionality into functions, methods, or classes to promote code reusability. When you need to make a change, you'll only need to do it in one place.

Suppose you're working on a JavaScript application that calculates the total price of items in a shopping cart. Initially, you have two separate functions for calculating the price of each item type: one for calculating the price of a book and another for calculating the price of a laptop. Here's the initial code:

function calculateBookPrice(quantity, price) {
    return quantity * price;
}

function calculateLaptopPrice(quantity, price) {
    return quantity * price;
}

While these functions work, they violate the DRY principle because the logic for calculating the total price is repeated for different item types. If you have more item types to calculate, you'll end up duplicating this logic. To follow the DRY principle and improve code maintainability, you can refactor the code as follows:

function calculateItemPrice(quantity, price) {
    return quantity * price;
}

const bookQuantity = 3;
const bookPrice = 25;

const laptopQuantity = 2;
const laptopPrice = 800;

const bookTotalPrice = calculateItemPrice(bookQuantity, bookPrice);
const laptopTotalPrice = calculateItemPrice(laptopQuantity, laptopPrice);

In this refactored code, we have a single calculateItemPrice function that calculates the total price for any item type based on the quantity and price provided as arguments. This adheres to the DRY principle because the calculation logic is no longer duplicated.

Now, you can easily calculate the total price for books, laptops, or any other item type by calling calculateItemPrice with the appropriate quantity and price values. This approach promotes code reusability, readability, and maintainability while reducing the risk of errors caused by duplicated code.

6 . Use Meaningful Whitespace

Properly format your code with spaces and line breaks. This enhances readability. Use whitespace to separate logical sections of your code. Well-formatted code is easier to scan, reducing the cognitive load on readers.

// Poor use of whitespace
const sum=function(a,b){return a+b;}

// Improved use of whitespace
const sum = function (a, b) {
    return a + b;
}

7 . Error Handling

Handle errors gracefully. Use appropriate try-catch blocks or error-handling mechanisms in your code. This prevents unexpected crashes and provides valuable information for debugging. Don't suppress errors or simply log them without a proper response.

// Inadequate error handling
try {
    result = divide(x, y);
} catch (error) {
    console.error("An error occurred");
}

// Proper error handling
try {
    result = divide(x, y);
} catch (error) {
    if (error instanceof ZeroDivisionError) {
        console.error("Division by zero error:", error.message);
    } else if (error instanceof ValueError) {
        console.error("Invalid input:", error.message);
    } else {
        console.error("An unexpected error occurred:", error.message);
    }
}

8 . Testing

Write unit tests to verify your code's correctness. Test-driven development (TDD) can help you write cleaner code by forcing you to consider edge cases and expected behavior upfront. Well-tested code is more reliable and easier to refactor.

// Example using JavaScript and the Jest testing framework
test('addition works correctly', () => {
    expect(add(2, 3)).toBe(5);
    expect(add(-1, 1)).toBe(0);
    expect(add(0, 0)).toBe(0);
});

9 . Refactoring

Refactor your code regularly. As requirements change and your understanding of the problem domain deepens, adjust your code accordingly. Refactoring helps maintain clean code as the project evolves. Don't be afraid to revisit and improve existing code when necessary.

Suppose you have a function that calculates the total price of items in a shopping cart with a fixed discount percentage:

function calculateTotalPrice(cartItems) {
    let totalPrice = 0;
    for (const item of cartItems) {
        totalPrice += item.price;
    }
    return totalPrice - (totalPrice * 0.1); // Apply a 10% discount
}

Initially, this function calculates the total price and applies a fixed discount of 10%. However, as the project evolves, you realize that you need to support variable discounts. To refactor the code to make it more flexible, you can introduce a discount parameter:

function calculateTotalPrice(cartItems, discountPercentage) {
    if (discountPercentage < 0 || discountPercentage > 100) {
        throw new Error("Discount percentage must be between 0 and 100.");
    }

    let totalPrice = 0;
    for (const item of cartItems) {
        totalPrice += item.price;
    }

    const discountAmount = (totalPrice * discountPercentage) / 100;
    return totalPrice - discountAmount;
}

In this refactored code:

We have added a discountPercentage parameter to the calculateTotalPrice function, allowing you to specify the discount percentage when calling the function.

We perform validation on the discountPercentage parameter to ensure it falls within a valid range (0 to 100%). If it's not within the range, we throw an error.

The discount calculation is now based on the provided discountPercentage, making the function more flexible and adaptable to changing requirements.

By refactoring the code in this way, you have improved its flexibility and maintainability. You can easily adapt the function to handle different discount scenarios without having to rewrite the entire logic. This demonstrates the importance of regular code refactoring as your project evolves and requirements change.

10 . Version Control

Use version control systems like Git to track changes to your code. This allows you to collaborate effectively with team members, revert to previous versions if necessary, and maintain a clean history of your project's development. Git provides tools for code review, branching, and merging, facilitating collaboration and code cleanliness.

Conclusion
Writing clean code is not just a set of rules but a mindset and a discipline. It's about creating software that is easy to read, maintain, and extend. By following these best practices and principles, you can become a more proficient developer who produces high-quality code.Investing time in meticulously examining fellow engineers' codebases, particularly in open-source projects, can be an enlightening experience. Through this exploration, you gain invaluable insights into diverse coding styles and strategies. This exposure enables you to distill the essence of writing pristine, sustainable codebases.. Remember that clean code is a continuous journey, and with practice, it becomes second nature, leading to more efficient and enjoyable software development.

profile
Sentry
Promoted

Sentry blog image

How I fixed 20 seconds of lag for every user in just 20 minutes.
Our AI agent was running 10-20 seconds slower than it should, impacting both our own developers and our early adopters. See how I used Sentry Profiling to fix it in record time.

Read more

Top comments (40)
Subscribe
pic
Add to the discussion
 
 
cezarytomczyk profile image
Cezary Tomczyk
•
Sep 17 '23

# Good comment
# Calculate the total score by incrementing x
total_score = x + 1
I am not sure what's good in that example, as the code is self-explanatory. :-)

I could see a good example like that:

# Good comment
# Converting a string to a number because the API returns the incorrect data type of a string when a number type is expected
totalUsers = Number(users);
The comment explains why value needs to be converted and prevents questions like "We don't need to convert value to number here".


29
 likes
Like
Reply
 
 
moopet profile image
Ben Sinclair
•
Sep 17 '23

Even then I'd refactor it into its own function and call it something like fixBrokenApiReturnType.


2
 likes
Like
Reply
 
 
cezarytomczyk profile image
Cezary Tomczyk
•
Sep 17 '23

The function name fixBrokenApiReturnType does not explain why it needs to be fixed. I'd eventually add a comment with the JIRA (or the like) ticket ID.


7
 likes
Like
Thread
 
barrymichaeldoyle profile image
Barry Michael Doyle
•
Sep 22 '23

Don't forget to JSDoc the living **** out that function as well xD


2
 likes
Like
Thread
 
cezarytomczyk profile image
Cezary Tomczyk
•
Sep 22 '23

@barrymichaeldoyle Roger that xD


2
 likes
Like
Reply
 
 
lionelrowe profile image
lionel-rowe
•
Sep 17 '23

Passive-aggressive function names, love it 😆 (I'm not being sarcastic, seeing people's exasperation come through in their comments/naming always gives me a good chuckle, and I've been known to do the same myself on occasion)


3
 likes
Like
Reply
 
 
ronaldroe profile image
Ronald Roe
•
Sep 28 '23

Even in your example, the comment isn't totally necessary. If that's JavaScript, it's clear what's happening. If it's another language, we could just cast to string, and that would be clear from the code. For instance:

int totalUsers = (int) users;


1
 like
Like
Reply
 
 
cezarytomczyk profile image
Cezary Tomczyk
•
Sep 28 '23

Even in your example, the comment isn't totally necessary. If that's JavaScript, it's clear what's happening.

My example code is clear, but only from the code perspective. The question is, why would you convert an incoming value to a number here? And to clarify, an additional comment would help here.


1
 like
Like
Reply
 
 
camco profile image
Camco
•
Sep 17 '23

Please give the credit to the author of this content...

As I was reading this, I knew it was directly from Clean Code: A Handbook of Agile Software Craftsmanship... So I pulled the book from my desk and confirmed it

en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Robert_C._...


15
 likes
Like
Reply
 
 
favourmark05 profile image
MFONIDO MARK 
•
Sep 17 '23 • Edited on Sep 20

Hi @camco
I appreciate your comment. However, I would like to clarify that the content I provided is a reflection of general knowledge and widely accepted industry practices. It has not been directly copied from any specific source, including 'Clean Code: A Handbook of Agile Software Craftsmanship.'


2
 likes
Like
Reply
 
 
defufna profile image
Ivan Savu
•
Sep 19 '23

Now this is a ChatGPT written comment if I ever seen one...


14
 likes
Like
Thread
 
wakywayne profile image
wakywayne
•
Sep 20 '23

So true 🤣


3
 likes
Like
Reply
 
 
syeo66 profile image
Red Ochsenbein (he/him)
•
Sep 17 '23 • Edited on Sep 17

Shorter functions are easier to understand, test, and maintain.

I'd say this is not always true. Just spitting everything into smaller functions can lead to way too much fragmentation and it requires you to jump across several functions and files to grasp the full picture. The same can happen because of the DRY principle.

Sometimes it makes sense to duplicate the same code for a) readability reasons and/or b) because it serves a different purpose and just happen to look the same.

In short: those things lead to premature abstraction (YAGNI is often the better approach)


9
 likes
Like
Reply
 
 
crisz profile image
crisz
•
Sep 18 '23

I conceptually divide the classes into two categories: master and utility.
The master code looks like this:

master:
utility.step1();
utility.step2();
if (condition) utility.step3();
utility.step4();
In this way, just reading the master code you can have a full picture of the flow and what it does.

On the other hand, often I see code like this:

foo:
bar:
fn1()
fn2:
fn3()
fn4()
fn5()
fn 6()
This is a code impossible to read and to maintain


4
 likes
Like
Reply
 
 
favourmark05 profile image
MFONIDO MARK 
•
Sep 17 '23

Thank you for your input. You've highlighted a valid point about the potential drawbacks of excessive code fragmentation and strict adherence to DRY. Balancing clean code with readability and avoiding premature abstraction is indeed a nuanced challenge. Context and project requirements often dictate the best approach. Your insights contribute to a valuable discussion on software development principles


1
 like
Like
Reply
 
 
nigelthorne profile image
Nigel Thorne
•
Sep 18 '23 • Edited on Sep 18

Good artical, but your examples are off.

Good comments explain "why" not how or what. Method names explain what. Method bodies explain how. It's often not taught like this as introductory programming books often use comments to explain what some piece of code is doing. Once you can read code you should not need that help.

Changing a method to have a discount argument is not an example of refactoring as it changes behaviour. In TDD, the red, green, refactor cycle, relies on the tests written in red, that you made pass in green. If you add behaviour in refactoring, you won't have a test for it. Refactoring is defined as changing the design or structure without changing the behaviour.

Keep up the work.


6
 likes
Like
Reply
 
 
favourmark05 profile image
MFONIDO MARK 
•
Sep 18 '23

Thanks for the feedback, Your insights are valuable.


2
 likes
Like
Reply
 
 
marcobrandizi profile image
Marco Brandizi
•
Sep 21 '23 • Edited on Sep 21

catch ( ex ) {
console.error(...)
}

This should only be done at the top level of your application, and in most cases it is already being done, eg, by your web container or CLI framework.

If the only thing you can do with an exception is reporting it, then IGNORE it and let the top level deal with reporting. This will do it in the way that was configured for the entire application (eg, it sends it to the app logger).

If you can detect a more specific anomaly, eg, your case where you have something like "Invalid input %s for ", then RETHROW ANOTHER exception, ATTACHING the original one (the stacktrace is very valuable for debugging).

If you can recover from an exception, then do it in the catch and log the workaround as a warning (eg, "Config file not found, using default config"). If you need to interrupt the normal flow, then catch and rethrow or return, DO NOT catch and let your regular code to continue (with bad data, inconsistent/insecure state, etc).

I see wrong ways of dealing with exceptions (empty catch, console.error(), out.println () ) all the time and it's so time-wasting and frustrating.


5
 likes
Like
Reply
 
 
sjames1958gm profile image
Stephen James
•
Sep 21 '23

I have been doing this for 47 years, and clean code has seldom been a fundamental skill.


4
 likes
Like
Reply
 
 
ronaldroe profile image
Ronald Roe
•
Sep 28 '23

I submit that if you're properly naming your variables and other structures, that constitutes good commenting. Comments should be rare, because your code should be so readable, you don't need them.

I know you aren't invoking Uncle Bob, here, but I'm going to. He covers that concept right in preface of the book, before he ever digs into the subject.


2
 likes
Like
Reply
 
 
danielmabadeje profile image
Daniel Mabadeje
•
Sep 17 '23

Thank you Mark,

Very Insightful 🔥👏👏


3
 likes
Like
Reply
 
 
favourmark05 profile image
MFONIDO MARK 
•
Sep 17 '23

Thank you Daniel


1
 like
Like
Reply
 
 
hasanelsherbiny profile image
Hasan Elsherbiny
•
Sep 17 '23

well explained article 👍


2
 likes
Like
Reply
 
 
narrinddhar_52 profile image
Narendra gorantla
•
Sep 19 '23

Good


2
 likes
Like
Reply
View full discussion (40 comments)
Code of Conduct • Report abuse
profile
Pieces.app
Promoted

A Workflow Copilot. Tailored to You.
Pieces.app image

Our desktop app, with its intelligent copilot, streamlines coding by generating snippets, extracting code from screenshots, and accelerating problem-solving.

Read the docs

Read next
dvelasquez profile image
Taming the CI Beast: Optimizing a Massive Next.js Application (Part 1)
Danilo Velasquez Urrutia - Jan 6

ganeshsrambikal profile image
Measuring Developer Experience (DX) with HEART: A Technology Focus
Ganesh Srambikal - Jan 6

afonsocrg profile image
Stop sharing your screen, start sharing your website
Afonso Gonçalves - Jan 6

shrsv profile image
Building DBChat - Explore and Evolve Your DB with Simple Chat (Part 1)
Shrijith Venkatramana - Jan 10


MFONIDO MARK
Follow
Software Developer || Developer Advocate 🥑 || Open Source Advocate || Community Manager
Location
Earth
Education
Bsc. Computer Science
Work
Software Developer
Joined
May 22, 2020
More from MFONIDO MARK
A Comprehensive Guide to Getting Started as a Technical Writer
#beginners #tutorial #productivity #programming
Error Messages: The Art of Effective Communication in Software Development
#productivity #javascript #webdev #programming
Debouncing in JavaScript
#javascript #webdev #programming #productivity
profile
Twilio
Promoted
Skip to main content
Research Computing
University of Colorado Boulder  documentation - Home
Getting Started

Navigating CURC Documentation
Logging In
Frequently Asked Questions
Current Semester Trainings
Acknowledging CURC Resources
The Compute Environment

Node types
Filesystems
The Modules System
Data Transfer
Compiling and Linking
Monitoring Resources
Clusters

Alpine
Blanca
Summit
Portals & Gateways

Open OnDemand (Browser Based HPC Portal)
Running Jobs

Slurm Flags, Partitions, and QoS
Useful Slurm Commands
squeue Status and Reason Codes
Running Applications with Jobs
Batch Jobs and Job Scripting
Interactive Jobs
Running Jobs on RoCE Enabled Nodes
Storage

The PetaLibrary
Cloud

AWS
Azure
GCP
CUmulus
Software

Load Balancer
Gaussian
Matlab
Python and R with Anaconda
GNU Parallel
VASP
Containerization
AlphaFold
Spack
SRA Toolkit on Alpine
Programming and Parallelization

Coding best practices
Fundamentals of parallel programming
MPI Best practices
Using MPI with C
Using MPI with Fortran
Using OpenMP with C
Using OpenMP with Fortran
Additional resources

CURC User Policies
Courses using CURC Resources
We want to hear from you!
Contributing to CURC Documentation
CURC Cheat Sheet
SSH Key-Based Authentication for Anschutz Medical Campus
Uploading an SSH Key to CILogon Registry
Blanca: Memorandum of Understanding
Facilities, equipment, and other resources
BioKEM Facility
CSU and ACCESS (XSEDE) usernames
Coding best practices
Programmers employ numerous tactics to ensure readable and organized code. These include:

using naming conventions for variables;

placing whitespace, indentations and tabs within code;

adding comments throughout to aid in interpretation.

In this tutorial we will examine these concepts.

Variable Naming Conventions
Variable naming is an important aspect in making your code readable. Naming variables follow a simple idea: Create variables that describe their function and which follow a consistent theme throughout your code. Let’s take a look at some naming conventions.

Multiword Delimited
This convention is to separate words in a variable name without the use of whitespace. Whitespace within variables is usually difficult for programming languages to interpret. Because of this variables must be delimited in some way. Here are several delimiting conventions commonly used in code:


Snakecase
Words are delimited by an underscore.

variable_one
variable_two

Pascalcase

Camelcase

Hungarian Notation
These conventions are by no means binding, but instead examples of how many programmers format their code. Consistency and readability are key ideas that should be utilized in the naming of variables. Regardless of how you choose to name your variables, always ensure that your naming conventions are consistent throughout the code. Consistency allows others to more easily understand your code.

Function and Class Naming conventions
Much like variable naming conventions, functions and classes should also follow a similar structure of descriptive titles delimited with the conventions described above. An important aspect of naming is to ensure your classes, functions, and variables can be distinguished from each other. For example, one could use Camelcase and Pascalcase for functions and classes respectively, while reserving Snakecase or Hungarian notation for variable names. Distinguishing functions, classes, and variables with different naming conventions can greatly aid other users of your code, and can eliminate the need for large sections of comments that would otherwise be needed.

Whitespace and Tabbing
Whitespace and tabbing are critical for organizing code. Whitespace is any space in your code that is not taken up by readable characters. Tabbing is one way to create whitespace in consistent units using the ‘tab’ key. While some languages ignore whitespace and tabbing all together, others entirely rely on the concept. Because of this, it is important to ensure your code is consistently organized. Whitespace and tabbing are often used to clarify nested loops and logical statements. Let’s look at some examples of C code that demonstrate the effect of whitespace.


Minimal Whitespace
#include <stdio.h>
int main(int argc, char const *argv[]) { int loop_Sum = 0; for(int i =
0; i < 50; i++){ loop_Sum += 1;} printf("%d\n", loop_Sum); return 0; }

Liberal use of Whitespace
It is important to note that like variable naming, whitespace can be utilized in various different styles and approaches. Just remember to use whitespace and tabbing in a consistent, readable style throughout your code.

Commenting your code
Commenting may be the most important way to organize and segment code. Comments are sections of code that the compiler ignores, which are useful to label code and segment code. For example, one can label loops, scopes, functions, and other code snippets with the intended functionality of the code. Lines with comments in code are preceded by a symbol that tells the compiler/interpretor to ignore that line, for example “#”, “!” or “;” (the symbol depends on the programming language). Let’s look at some C++ code that uses no comments vs. comments.


No comments
#include <stdio.h>
#include <vector>

using namespace std;

int main(int argc, char** argv){

    vector<int> multiples;

    for(int i = 0; i < 50; i++){
        if(i % 5 == 0){
            multiples.push_back(i);
        }
    }

    for(int i; i < multiples.size(); i++){
        printf("%d is a multiple of 5\n", multiples[i]);
    }

    return 0;
}

Comments
Note

It is entirely possible to “over comment” code. Code should be designed in an efficient, consistent and intuitive manner such that comments enhance user understanding but are not needed to describe the entire code.

1
5
Search Quora
Profile photo for Hieu Doan
What are the best practices for writing clean and maintainable code in [insert programming language]?
Sort
Profile photo for Code 24/7
Code 24/7
 · 
Follow
Sr Software Architect at Computer Science and Information Technology (2010–present)1y
Please see below my answer,

Naming: Consistently use descriptive names.

Modularity: Divide code into smaller, more focused functions or classes.

Comments: Include comments for clarification and context.

Version Control: For tracking changes, use Git.

Error Handling: Implement error handling that is robust.

Formatting: Use the same coding style throughout.

Code Reviews: Conduct quality control reviews.

Testing: Create thorough unit tests.

Performance: Optimize as needed, with readability as a top priority.

Replace **Magic Numbers/Strings** with named constants.

Reusability: Develop reusable utilities or libraries.

SOLID Principles: When designing, adhere to SOLID principles.

Simplicity: Put simplicity first (KISS principle).

"Follow for a daily dose of humor, and don't forget to drop a comment! Because let's face it, laughter is the best accessory in this stylish journey called life. 😄✨"

960 views
View 1 upvote
Answer requested by 
Ayesha Sumbal
Sponsored by JetBrains
Develop Python with PyCharm.
PyCharm makes navigating complex code easy, refactoring stress-free, and development a breeze.
Your response is private
Is this ad relevant to you?
This helps us show better ads for you.
Absolutely not
Definitely yes
Profile photo for Emanuel Popescu
Emanuel Popescu
 · 
Follow
Senior Software Engineer at Playtika1y
Originally Answered: What are some important rules to follow when writing clean, readable, and maintainable code?
Working with legacy code was a real eye-opener for me in understanding concepts like KISS, YAGNI, SOLID, and DRY. Initially, these principles seemed abstract to me, but their value became evident when I had to improve and maintain existing codebases.

Questions about readability and software craftsmanship principles became central to my approach. I often wondered about the original context of the code and the decisions behind its structure. What was the reason behind this change? Why the developer choose this approach and what were the tradeoffs? Was this solution part of a hotfix?

Before diving into any changes, I always start with creating a separate working branch, focusing on the importance of version control.

Additionally, selecting the right IDE and getting comfortable with various shortcuts can really boost coding efficiency, transforming the refactoring process from a mere task into something genuinely enjoyable.

While adhering to the Pareto principle, I've found that focusing on the most impactful 20% of coding rules can improve 80% of a codebase's quality. It’s important to mention that those rules are not one-size-fits-all and require judgment to discern which rules are most relevant in a given context.

When I begin refactoring, I use techniques such as:

Extracting explaining variables for clarity.
Using explaining class constants for magic numbers and strings.
Applying guard clauses for better formatting.
Reordering code for readability.
Extracting repeated code into methods or helper classes.
Adhering to language standards (like naming conventions in the programming language the project uses).
A specific example of applying the Single Responsibility Principle is when I encountered a class overloaded with multiple functionalities. By breaking it down into smaller, purpose-focused classes, the code became more manageable and easier to understand.

Testing is a crucial aspect often overlooked. Unit tests enable confident refactoring, but it's also important to trust your instincts and double-check the tests' accuracy.

Other practices include moving declaration and initialization together and striving for self-explanatory code that minimizes the need for comments. However, this view on commenting is subjective and depends on the context (complex algorithms might required explanatory comments)

Those are just some of the rules I follow, but I’m pretty sure that there is much more to learn. Depending on the level of experience and the ecosystem the developers works in, the perspective might be different and I see no problem in there as long as it aligns with his team.

There are some goods books on this topic:

Tidy First? - Kent Beck
The Software Craftsman - Sandro Mancuso
Clean Code - Robert C Martin
The Pragmatic Programmer - David Thomas and Andrew Hunt
Remember, the best practices for writing clean, readable, and maintainable code will vary based on your experience, the development ecosystem, and team dynamics. The goal is always to align with your team and continuously improve your craft.

518 views
1 of 2 answers
Profile photo for Tertius Baardwijk
Tertius Baardwijk
 · 
Follow
Former Meta EngineerUpdated Sep 2
Originally Answered: What are the best practices for writing clean and maintainable code?
Clean and maintainable code is the one which is not written and does not exist.

With any other code you will have head pressure even if author claims that it is clean and maintainable, because to work with the code you need to move its structure into your brain’s long term memory, which means that you need to learn it first.

Few simple general hints are

Do not write code if problem can be solved by other means, cleanest and maintainable code is the one which does not exist
Do not write new code if problem can be solved by existing code, for example, by some library
Do not dump lots of code and other artifacts into one place pretending that somebody will be able to hold it in their heads, human brain cannot hold more than 7–9 items in the memory at the same time, try to keep code blocks and other artifacts within 10 items limit, there are static analyzers, which allow you to define these limits and give you alerts on large methods, etc.
Write consistent code, follow the same coding style, if you name something some way then keep this style across all code, it is super difficult to read inconsistent code, use code style static analyzer for your favorite language and get real time alerts if something is not according to coding conventions
Name code items according that what they are and/or what they do, use thesaurus if you have trouble finding proper names, push much more explanation into names of variables and other items if they have long scope / life time
Keep code cyclomatic complexity within limits, there are plugins for multiple IDEs, which allow you to define limits and alert if your code is too complex
226 views
View 1 upvote
1 of 9 answers
Sponsored by Grammarly
Free English writing tool.
Write clearly in English with no mistakes. Try our free writing app!
Profile photo for M. Andersen
M. Andersen
 · 
Follow
Programmer1y
Originally Answered: What are some best practices for writing clean and maintainable code?
1: Don’t slack on function and variable names

One of the easiest ways to make the code more readable, is to choose good names for your variables.

These two pieces of code do the same thing:

float calc(float a, float b) { 
	return a * (1 + b / 100); 
} 
And:

float calculatePriceInclVat(float priceExclVat, float vatRate) { 
	return priceExclVat * (1 + vatRate / 100); 
} 
In the second example, it’s perfectly clear what the function does for you, and which arguments it takes. The first would need explanation.

2: Avoid or limit nesting when possible

Nesting can make reading code very difficult, because you need to remember a lot in your mental picture of the code structure.

It’s often possible to “merge” statements, or separate it into smaller functions. Check these two examples:

if (a) { 
	if (b) { 
		if (c) { 
			// When a, b and c are true 
		} else if (d) { 
			// When a, b and d are true 
		} 
	} 
} 
This code can actually be simplified to:

if (a && b && c) { 
	// When a, b and c are true 
} else if (a && b && d) { 
	// When a, b and d are true 
} 
Sometimes — especially in conjunction with the pattern that functions should have only one responsibility — it also makes sense to put the logic in a nested block into a separate function.

3: Be consistent

When trying to familiarize yourself with a large code base, few things can be more confusing that unexplained changes in coding style, approach, etc.

4: Determine which patterns to follow, and follow them

If you can tell a programmer you’re trying to onboard that you follow this and that pattern, they can much more quickly understand the structure of your code. At least if done consistently.

5: Introduce new concepts when they have proven their worth

In long-term projects it can be tempting, or often necessary, to introduce new patterns or ways of doing things. When you do, make sure that it’s tested first, and that it actually contributes positively to the project. Otherwise you end up having a fraction of your code base suddenly following a new pattern or doing things in a different way.

6: Annotations

Annotations can be very helpful, and they can help in producing documentation.

At my work place, on top of the normal stuff, we use annotations to tell where test cases and documentation are, as well as which tickets have influenced the logic of the method.

7: Map it out

Map out your code logic, before you write it.

8: Keep functions simple

Depending on language and philosophy, it often goes that a function should have only one responsibility — i.e. a function should not both calculate the value of an order and charge the money. One function should calculate the total, and another should charge.

That makes the code more digestible, and also more re-usable and maintainable.

9: Organize and structure the code logically

Use namespaces and a consistent folder structure.

10: Code reviews

If you are part of a team, conduct code reviews, and adopt a culture where people speak up when code could be cleaner. Both the coder and the reviewer learn from this.

555 views
View 1 upvote
1 of 9 answers
Profile photo for Cap Kowsick
Cap Kowsick
 · 
Follow
All like gadget ,So learn the Programming language
 · 
1y
Hi friend 😉

Ensuring clean and maintainable code is crucial in the world of software development. To achieve this, there are certain best practices that one can implement in any programming language. Consistency in coding styles and formatting is key to enhancing the readability and maintainability of your code. Additionally, writing simple, modular, and focused code not only makes it easier to understand but also facilitates easier maintenance. It is also important to use meaningful and descriptive names for variables and functions as it improves readability and comprehension.

Follow my space … (more)
Sponsored by Interactive Brokers
Award Winning Platform. Rated #1 Broker by Barron's.
Trade Like a Pro with IBKR: Invest in Global Stocks, Options, Futures & More! Your capital is at risk.
There was an error loading more items.
1 answer collapsed (Why?)
Related questions
What are some best practices for writing clean and maintainable code?
What are the best practices for writing efficient and maintainable code?
What are some benefits of writing code that is clean and maintainable?
What are some tips for writing a clean and maintainable code in software development?
Which programming language has the most maintainable code?
What are the best practices for writing a clean and maintainable front-end code?
What makes a program's code maintainable?
What are the best practices for writing clean and maintainable Python code?
What are the best practices for writing clean, maintainable, and reusable front-end code?
What are the best practices for writing clean and maintainable code in software development?
What does clean code mean?
How do I make sure my code is easily maintainable and extensible?
What's the best way to write clean code?
What are the top 5 things that I can do to make my code maintainable?
How should I structure my code, and how do I make it maintainable?
Related questions
What are some best practices for writing clean and maintainable code?
What are the best practices for writing efficient and maintainable code?
What are some benefits of writing code that is clean and maintainable?
What are some tips for writing a clean and maintainable code in software development?
Which programming language has the most maintainable code?
What are the best practices for writing a clean and maintainable front-end code?
Add question


1
5
Search Quora
Profile photo for Hieu Doan
What are the best practices for writing clean and maintainable code in [insert programming language]?
Sort
Profile photo for Code 24/7
Code 24/7
 · 
Follow
Sr Software Architect at Computer Science and Information Technology (2010–present)1y
Please see below my answer,

Naming: Consistently use descriptive names.

Modularity: Divide code into smaller, more focused functions or classes.

Comments: Include comments for clarification and context.

Version Control: For tracking changes, use Git.

Error Handling: Implement error handling that is robust.

Formatting: Use the same coding style throughout.

Code Reviews: Conduct quality control reviews.

Testing: Create thorough unit tests.

Performance: Optimize as needed, with readability as a top priority.

Replace **Magic Numbers/Strings** with named constants.

Reusability: Develop reusable utilities or libraries.

SOLID Principles: When designing, adhere to SOLID principles.

Simplicity: Put simplicity first (KISS principle).

"Follow for a daily dose of humor, and don't forget to drop a comment! Because let's face it, laughter is the best accessory in this stylish journey called life. 😄✨"

960 views
View 1 upvote
Answer requested by 
Ayesha Sumbal
Sponsored by JetBrains
Develop Python with PyCharm.
PyCharm makes navigating complex code easy, refactoring stress-free, and development a breeze.
Your response is private
Is this ad relevant to you?
This helps us show better ads for you.
Absolutely not
Definitely yes
Profile photo for Emanuel Popescu
Emanuel Popescu
 · 
Follow
Senior Software Engineer at Playtika1y
Originally Answered: What are some important rules to follow when writing clean, readable, and maintainable code?
Working with legacy code was a real eye-opener for me in understanding concepts like KISS, YAGNI, SOLID, and DRY. Initially, these principles seemed abstract to me, but their value became evident when I had to improve and maintain existing codebases.

Questions about readability and software craftsmanship principles became central to my approach. I often wondered about the original context of the code and the decisions behind its structure. What was the reason behind this change? Why the developer choose this approach and what were the tradeoffs? Was this solution part of a hotfix?

Before diving into any changes, I always start with creating a separate working branch, focusing on the importance of version control.

Additionally, selecting the right IDE and getting comfortable with various shortcuts can really boost coding efficiency, transforming the refactoring process from a mere task into something genuinely enjoyable.

While adhering to the Pareto principle, I've found that focusing on the most impactful 20% of coding rules can improve 80% of a codebase's quality. It’s important to mention that those rules are not one-size-fits-all and require judgment to discern which rules are most relevant in a given context.

When I begin refactoring, I use techniques such as:

Extracting explaining variables for clarity.
Using explaining class constants for magic numbers and strings.
Applying guard clauses for better formatting.
Reordering code for readability.
Extracting repeated code into methods or helper classes.
Adhering to language standards (like naming conventions in the programming language the project uses).
A specific example of applying the Single Responsibility Principle is when I encountered a class overloaded with multiple functionalities. By breaking it down into smaller, purpose-focused classes, the code became more manageable and easier to understand.

Testing is a crucial aspect often overlooked. Unit tests enable confident refactoring, but it's also important to trust your instincts and double-check the tests' accuracy.

Other practices include moving declaration and initialization together and striving for self-explanatory code that minimizes the need for comments. However, this view on commenting is subjective and depends on the context (complex algorithms might required explanatory comments)

Those are just some of the rules I follow, but I’m pretty sure that there is much more to learn. Depending on the level of experience and the ecosystem the developers works in, the perspective might be different and I see no problem in there as long as it aligns with his team.

There are some goods books on this topic:

Tidy First? - Kent Beck
The Software Craftsman - Sandro Mancuso
Clean Code - Robert C Martin
The Pragmatic Programmer - David Thomas and Andrew Hunt
Remember, the best practices for writing clean, readable, and maintainable code will vary based on your experience, the development ecosystem, and team dynamics. The goal is always to align with your team and continuously improve your craft.

518 views
1 of 2 answers
Profile photo for Tertius Baardwijk
Tertius Baardwijk
 · 
Follow
Former Meta EngineerUpdated Sep 2
Originally Answered: What are the best practices for writing clean and maintainable code?
Clean and maintainable code is the one which is not written and does not exist.

With any other code you will have head pressure even if author claims that it is clean and maintainable, because to work with the code you need to move its structure into your brain’s long term memory, which means that you need to learn it first.

Few simple general hints are

Do not write code if problem can be solved by other means, cleanest and maintainable code is the one which does not exist
Do not write new code if problem can be solved by existing code, for example, by some library
Do not dump lots of code and other artifacts into one place pretending that somebody will be able to hold it in their heads, human brain cannot hold more than 7–9 items in the memory at the same time, try to keep code blocks and other artifacts within 10 items limit, there are static analyzers, which allow you to define these limits and give you alerts on large methods, etc.
Write consistent code, follow the same coding style, if you name something some way then keep this style across all code, it is super difficult to read inconsistent code, use code style static analyzer for your favorite language and get real time alerts if something is not according to coding conventions
Name code items according that what they are and/or what they do, use thesaurus if you have trouble finding proper names, push much more explanation into names of variables and other items if they have long scope / life time
Keep code cyclomatic complexity within limits, there are plugins for multiple IDEs, which allow you to define limits and alert if your code is too complex
226 views
View 1 upvote
1 of 9 answers
Sponsored by Grammarly
Free English writing tool.
Write clearly in English with no mistakes. Try our free writing app!
Profile photo for M. Andersen
M. Andersen
 · 
Follow
Programmer1y
Originally Answered: What are some best practices for writing clean and maintainable code?
1: Don’t slack on function and variable names

One of the easiest ways to make the code more readable, is to choose good names for your variables.

These two pieces of code do the same thing:

float calc(float a, float b) { 
	return a * (1 + b / 100); 
} 
And:

float calculatePriceInclVat(float priceExclVat, float vatRate) { 
	return priceExclVat * (1 + vatRate / 100); 
} 
In the second example, it’s perfectly clear what the function does for you, and which arguments it takes. The first would need explanation.

2: Avoid or limit nesting when possible

Nesting can make reading code very difficult, because you need to remember a lot in your mental picture of the code structure.

It’s often possible to “merge” statements, or separate it into smaller functions. Check these two examples:

if (a) { 
	if (b) { 
		if (c) { 
			// When a, b and c are true 
		} else if (d) { 
			// When a, b and d are true 
		} 
	} 
} 
This code can actually be simplified to:

if (a && b && c) { 
	// When a, b and c are true 
} else if (a && b && d) { 
	// When a, b and d are true 
} 
Sometimes — especially in conjunction with the pattern that functions should have only one responsibility — it also makes sense to put the logic in a nested block into a separate function.

3: Be consistent

When trying to familiarize yourself with a large code base, few things can be more confusing that unexplained changes in coding style, approach, etc.

4: Determine which patterns to follow, and follow them

If you can tell a programmer you’re trying to onboard that you follow this and that pattern, they can much more quickly understand the structure of your code. At least if done consistently.

5: Introduce new concepts when they have proven their worth

In long-term projects it can be tempting, or often necessary, to introduce new patterns or ways of doing things. When you do, make sure that it’s tested first, and that it actually contributes positively to the project. Otherwise you end up having a fraction of your code base suddenly following a new pattern or doing things in a different way.

6: Annotations

Annotations can be very helpful, and they can help in producing documentation.

At my work place, on top of the normal stuff, we use annotations to tell where test cases and documentation are, as well as which tickets have influenced the logic of the method.

7: Map it out

Map out your code logic, before you write it.

8: Keep functions simple

Depending on language and philosophy, it often goes that a function should have only one responsibility — i.e. a function should not both calculate the value of an order and charge the money. One function should calculate the total, and another should charge.

That makes the code more digestible, and also more re-usable and maintainable.

9: Organize and structure the code logically

Use namespaces and a consistent folder structure.

10: Code reviews

If you are part of a team, conduct code reviews, and adopt a culture where people speak up when code could be cleaner. Both the coder and the reviewer learn from this.

555 views
View 1 upvote
1 of 9 answers
Profile photo for Cap Kowsick
Cap Kowsick
 · 
Follow
All like gadget ,So learn the Programming language
 · 
1y
Hi friend 😉

Ensuring clean and maintainable code is crucial in the world of software development. To achieve this, there are certain best practices that one can implement in any programming language. Consistency in coding styles and formatting is key to enhancing the readability and maintainability of your code. Additionally, writing simple, modular, and focused code not only makes it easier to understand but also facilitates easier maintenance. It is also important to use meaningful and descriptive names for variables and functions as it improves readability and comprehension.

Follow my space … (more)
Sponsored by Interactive Brokers
Award Winning Platform. Rated #1 Broker by Barron's.
Trade Like a Pro with IBKR: Invest in Global Stocks, Options, Futures & More! Your capital is at risk.
There was an error loading more items.
1 answer collapsed (Why?)
Related questions
What are some best practices for writing clean and maintainable code?
What are the best practices for writing efficient and maintainable code?
What are some benefits of writing code that is clean and maintainable?
What are some tips for writing a clean and maintainable code in software development?
Which programming language has the most maintainable code?
What are the best practices for writing a clean and maintainable front-end code?
What makes a program's code maintainable?
What are the best practices for writing clean and maintainable Python code?
What are the best practices for writing clean, maintainable, and reusable front-end code?
What are the best practices for writing clean and maintainable code in software development?
What does clean code mean?
How do I make sure my code is easily maintainable and extensible?
What's the best way to write clean code?
What are the top 5 things that I can do to make my code maintainable?
How should I structure my code, and how do I make it maintainable?
Related questions
What are some best practices for writing clean and maintainable code?
What are the best practices for writing efficient and maintainable code?
What are some benefits of writing code that is clean and maintainable?
What are some tips for writing a clean and maintainable code in software development?
Which programming language has the most maintainable code?
What are the best practices for writing a clean and maintainable front-end code?
Add question


Advertisement


Advertisement

Advertisement


Advertisement
Beta
0 / 10
used queries
1
Join TestMu ConferenceKaneAI - World's First E2E Software Testing Agent.
Book a DemoJoin TestMu Conference
Logo
Platform 
Solutions Resources Developers Pricing
Login
Book a Demo
Get Started Free
Next-Gen App & Browser
Testing Cloud

Trusted by 2 Mn+ QAs & Devs to accelerate their release cycles

Arrow
...
Start free with Google
Start free with Email
Next-Gen App & Browser Testing Cloud
Testing BasicsHome/Learning Hub/Coding Standards Tutorial-September 29 2023
A complete Guide to Coding Standards and Best Practices
Unlock essential coding standards and best practices for superior code quality. Learn through examples and elevate your coding skills.

Share:
Facebook
Twitter
LinkedIn
OVERVIEW

Coding standards are a set of rules and guidelines that ensure consistency, readability, maintainability, and reliability in software development. They are like a roadmap that helps developers write code in a structured and organized manner. Coding standards can vary depending on the programming language or technology used and the organization or community involved.

When building code-based projects, we try to stick to the plans in the design document. Those plans tell us how each part should work and fit together. Following coding standards helps make sure our code is good - easy to read and not too buggy.

The standards give programmers rules of thumb for writing clean code that does what it should. The main goal in coding is turning the design document into actual code using a programming language, and then we test all the pieces individually.

What are Coding Standards and Guidelines?
Coding guidelines and standards help write clear code that makes sense. They lay out rules so programmers know how to use their code uniformly, making reading and understanding code easier when working on big projects with other developers. It's hard to collaborate when everyone writes code differently.

Following coding style rules improves consistency across a codebase. You don't have to figure out multiple formatting approaches when scanning through files. It also helps avoid silly bugs from typos when spacing or names aren't consistent. We all love having tidy, clean code with consistent naming and spacing. It makes projects feel tightly organized.

Another perk of defined coding conventions is better maintenance down the road. When code look and feel is standardized, revisiting old sections and quickly understanding what's going on is easier. Isn’t it a tedious task to update messy, irregular code? Cleanly formatted code helps you work faster and with more confidence.

Overall, using standardized conventions leads to higher-quality code with fewer bugs. Following style guidelines takes more discipline upfront but saves time and headaches in the long run. It leads to smoother teamwork and better end products.

Why are Coding Standards Important?
Coding standards are really important for a bunch of reasons. First, having good standards helps stop bugs and security holes from happening because of bad code. It's a lot easier to spot problems when everything is written consistently.

Second, coding standards make it much simpler for new people to jump into the codebase. If there's a standard format, it's not as tough to figure out what's going on. The code gets way more clear when everyone does things the same way.

Finally, standards let you break the code into modules anyone can work on. You don't have to worry about stepping on someone's toes or messing up their stuff. The codebase becomes more flexible when every piece is written to the same rules.

Note
Note : Test your code across 3000+ real desktop and mobile browsers.Try LambdaTest Now!

Key Aspects of Coding Standards
When it comes to writing code, developers adhere to coding standards - a set of guidelines and best practices. These standards are crucial for maintaining consistency, readability, maintainability, and reliability in software development. Let's explore some key aspects of coding standards:

Coding standards can vary a lot depending on the programming language and specific project or organization. But even though the details might differ, some general things come up in most coding standards. Organizations typically use them so all the code looks the same no matter who wrote it. Here's an overview of what coding standards often include:

Naming conventions: In coding, naming conventions are pivotal in code readability and maintainability. It's essential to use descriptive and meaningful names for variables, functions, classes, and modules. Choosing between CamelCase (e.g., myVariableName) or snake_case (e.g., my_variable_name) should align with the programming language conventions you are using.
Consistency is key – ensure that you maintain the chosen naming conventions throughout your entire codebase. Avoid the use of single-letter variable names and ambiguous abbreviations, as they can make code difficult to understand and maintain.

Formatting and indentation: Consistent code formatting and indentation greatly contribute to code clarity and aesthetics. Adhering to a unified indentation style, whether 2 or 4 spaces, is essential.
Additionally, it's a good practice to limit line length, typically to 80 or 120 characters, to prevent the need for excessive horizontal scrolling while reading the code. Ensure that braces {} and parentheses () are consistent throughout your code, enhancing code uniformity and readability.

Comments and documentation: Comments serve as a means to provide clarity and context within your code. It's important to use comments judiciously. Comments can explain sections of your code and describe the purpose, parameters, return values, potential errors, and exceptions of methods or functions.
They can also summarize the roles of files, classes, and any intricate steps within the code. However, avoiding excessive or redundant comments that clutter up the code and may become outdated over time is advisable.

Error handling: Ensure that error messages provide information for the smooth handling of failures. Utilize exception-handling mechanisms specific to the programming language being used.
Organize code: Group code tasks into blocks or functions separated by whitespace and provide comments to clarify the purpose of each block. Organize related code into modules or packages for better organization and maintainability. Keep classes and functions focused on responsibilities to improve code clarity. Prefer imports over wildcard imports for better module management.
Principle of DRY (Don't Repeat Yourself): Write code in a way that minimizes duplication and repetition.
Code reusability: Encapsulate sections of code into functions or methods for efficient reuse. Create shared libraries or utility modules to house used functionalities.
Open-source code readability: Ensure open-source projects maintain readability to facilitate contributor collaboration. Familiarize yourself with the source code of open-source projects to better understand their structure and functionality.
Refactoring: Improve the readability of existing code without changing its functionality.
Avoid deep nesting structure: Reduce nesting within the code for improved clarity and ease of understanding.
Use short line length: Prefer shorter line lengths, such as 80 characters, as it enhances readability and comprehension of the codebase. Avoid lines that can be difficult to manage effectively.
Version control: Adhere to practices in version control by providing informative commit messages following appropriate branching strategies and utilizing pull requests for seamless collaboration among team members.
OOPs vs. Procedural programming: Select either object-oriented programming or procedural programming based on the requirements and nature of your project.
Testing: It is important to write unit and integration tests to ensure the quality of our code. Additionally, implement automated testing to validate the functionality of your software regularly.
Performance: When it comes to performance, prioritize using algorithms and data structures. Optimization should only be done when necessary based on profiling results to avoid complexity.
Organization: Proper organization of files and folders is crucial for maintenance and readability. You can achieve this by organizing code into folders that reflect different components or modules.
Security: Security is a top priority. It is important to validate all input to prevent any security vulnerabilities. It is also essential to store sensitive information and avoid hardcoding it directly into the codebase.
Review: To ensure high-quality code, conducting peer reviews is essential. By involving team members in reviewing code, you can identify any issues early in the development process. Utilizing coding standards checklists during these reviews can help maintain quality across the project.
It's important to remember that coding standards and guidelines may evolve over time. Regularly updating them aligns with best practices and project requirements, making collaboration easier for current and future developers working on the project.

Advantages of Coding Standards in Software Development
Coding standards provide numerous benefits when applied in software development, offering advantages that enhance the overall quality and efficiency of the development process.

Enhance efficiency: Software developers seem to spend a ton of time fixing code quality problems they could've avoided. If programming teams set up some standards and best practices, it'd help them spot issues early or even stop them from happening. Doing this would make the whole software process way more efficient.
Teams need to implement some rules and guidelines to avoid bugs and mistakes in their code; that way, developers don't waste as much time-solving problems later. Setting up some best practices would let programmers find or prevent problems quickly. This could improve how well the software process works.

Reduce the risk of project failure: Implementing code quality standards can help software projects. It lowers the risk of failure, often when developing the software. The standards make the code less complex, too. Complex code means more of a chance for issues to sneak in, and with simpler, standardized code, fewer errors exist.
Easy to maintain: Coding standards make working with code easier. When everything looks the same, you don't have to waste as much time figuring out what someone else did. It's like if you had to read a book that constantly switched between fonts and languages.
Rectify bugs: Following the rules helps you avoid common mistakes, too. Code that follows best practices is less likely to contain logic errors, typos, or other mistakes that can lead to software malfunctions.
Improve collaboration: Coding standards can help different folks work together better. When the whole team sticks to the same rules, it gets less confusing to look at each other's work, talk it over, and tweak stuff. People feel like they're part of the same crew instead of doing their own thing. It makes the collaboration more tight-knit.
Maintain consistency across the codebase: Keeping to a standard style across all the code helps it feel cohesive, and things don't get messy or fragmented when everyone plays by the same rules.
Easier code reviews: Code reviews and static analysis can be easier when coders use style guides. The reviewers don't have to waste time on random spacing or capitalization choices. Instead, they can zoom in on the logic and functionality, which is more important.
Cost-efficient: A clear coding style lets programmers reuse components of the code whenever needed, reducing the work and cost spent making the software.
Smooth onboarding for new team members: When a new dev joins the team, having standards helps them figure out the code quickly, and they can get used to the conventions already in place, so there's less of a learning curve.
Better code documentation: Good code documentation helps others understand what's going on. Comments explain what the code is doing so developers don't have to spend as much time walking through it.
Enhance scalability: As a project gets bigger, keeping the same style gets more important. Standards help the code stay organized and easy to build on as you add new stuff. They also keep things in line with what other businesses are doing. You want to stay caught up with old tech when everyone else has moved on to the latest trends.
Alignment with industry best practices: Coding standards often incorporate industry best practices, ensuring that the code follows accepted guidelines and aligns with the latest trends and technologies. Overall, rules or standards help ensure the coding is done right and stays manageable over time. They save work down the road.
Coding Standards and Guidelines
Coding standards play an important role in software development, providing a solid foundation for improving code quality, readability, and maintainability. In this section, we will delve into essential principles and guidelines that empower developers to create efficient and error-free code.

By following these practices, development teams can build codebases that meet industry standards and promote smooth collaboration and future enhancements.

Understanding the importance of coding standards: Coding standards play a crucial role in software development. Their purpose is to limit the use of elements in programming languages, thus preventing situations where code behavior becomes undefined or unspecified.
Additionally, coding standards discourage using error constructs such as "goto." One of their advantages is that they enhance code quality by improving readability, maintainability, and portability. For instance, coding standards often suggest using "typedef" to simplify structures, ultimately reducing overall code complexity.

Significance of industry-recognized standards: When choosing coding standards, it is crucial to consider their recognition within your industry. This decision significantly affects the effort required to meet end users' requirements and qualifications. The best example is MISRA C and C++, initially developed for the industry and later widely adopted as de facto standards for safety-critical applications.
Embracing rules and recommendations: Coding standards generally consist of two components- rules and recommendations. Rules serve as the foundation for defining code compliance requirements.
Modern rules are designed to be verified using static analyzers, ensuring that code adheres to established standards. On the other hand, recommendations are advisory and provide engineers with flexibility in their implementation choices.

Most coding standards contain both elements. Some, such as ISO/IEC TS 17961:2013 C secure coding rules and MISRA C:2004, mainly consist of rules.

Enhance rule understanding for clarity: Every rule in a coding standard should have a definition. It is helpful to provide an identification string, a summary of the rules' purpose, and a detailed description that provides context. These descriptions can include examples of compliant and noncompliant behavior and exceptions to the rule.
Maintaining consistency in module headers, which contain information like module name, creation date, creator's name, modification history, module summary, and accessed variables, contributes to code comprehension and ease of maintenance.

Ensure clear usage of variables: To ensure code clarity, assign names to variables so that each variable serves one specific and well-defined purpose. Using a variable for multiple functions or values can confuse developers who read the code and make future modifications more challenging.
Incorporate a formal exception handling mechanism: Managing unexpected events that disrupt code execution is essential. Implement strategies such as trying to catch blocks, enabling recovery mechanisms considering software or network latency issues, and conducting real-time log analysis to minimize the impact of exceptions.
Choose between open and closed standards: Coding standards can be divided into open standards (e.g., CERT) or closed standards (e.g., MISRA). Open standards promote community involvement, while closed standards offer stability and are preferred in safety-critical industries to meet mandatory requirements.
Prioritize and evaluate coding rules: Classify coding rule violations based on severity to assess code quality effectively. Prioritize bug fixes to determine if the code is ready for production or requires refinement.
Plan for rule exceptions: Acknowledge that coding rules may not always be universally applicable and have a plan for exceptions. Identify which guidelines can be reasonably deviated from outline deviation procedures and ensure adequate documentation, particularly for auditing purposes.
Provide additional resources: One of the objectives of coding standards is education. Additional resources can assist developers in understanding and following guidelines. These resources may include information, references to helpful documentation, mentions of alternative coding standards, and practical examples from real-life scenarios. This helps foster a grasp of the guidelines and how they can be applied in practical situations.
...
Coding Standards for Various Programming Languages
Coding standards can vary a lot depending on the programming language and specific project or organization. But even though the details might differ, some general things come up in most coding standards. Organizations usually use them so all the code looks the same no matter who wrote it. Here's an overview of what coding standards often include:

Java Coding Guidelines

Guidelines for coding in Java play a role in maintaining consistency, readability, and collaboration. Let's delve deeper into these guidelines:

Naming conventions: Adhere to naming conventions. Use PascalCase for class names (e.g., MyClass), camelCase for method names (e.g., calculateSalary), UPPERCASE_WITH_UNDERSCORES for constants (e.g., MAX_LENGTH), and camelCase for variables (e.g., count, userName).
Formatting: Consistently use four spaces for indentation, and ensure that curly braces begin on the same line as the declaration to enhance code readability.
Comments and documentation: Utilize JavaDoc style comments to document classes, methods, and critical fields. Comments also help clarify logic or non-obvious sections of code.
Imports: Avoid wildcard imports (e.g., import java.util.*). Explicitly import necessary classes and logically group imports to maintain a clean codebase.
Class structure: Organize class members logically, including fields, instance fields, constructors, and methods. Properly use access modifiers (protected, private) for encapsulation.
Exceptions: Handle exceptions by catching only those that can be effectively managed. When necessary, log or report exceptions for debugging and error tracking.
Avoid hardcoded values: Replace hard coded numbers and strings with constants or enumerations to improve code readability and maintainability.
Reduce code blocks: Reduce the depth of nested blocks to enhance code clarity and reduce complexity.
Utilize Enums for constants: Use Enums to represent sets of constants with related meanings, promoting code maintainability.
JavaDoc documentation: Document public classes, methods, and fields using JavaDoc comments. Include explanations of their purpose, usage, and possible exceptions.
Null handling: Minimize null values and employ null checks when necessary to ensure reliable code execution and prevent NullPointerExceptions.
Consider performance implications: Optimize your code by implementing efficient algorithms and managing resources carefully. Remember to close files and database connections when they are no longer needed.
Unit testing: Write unit tests following the Arrange-Act-Assert (AAA) pattern to verify the functionality of your code. Identify and address issues that may arise during testing.
JavaScript Coding Guidelines

JavaScript coding guidelines are crucial for maintaining readable and maintainable code. Let's explore these guidelines:

Indentation and formatting: Choose a consistent indentation style (two spaces, four spaces, or tabs) and apply it uniformly throughout your code. Ensure that you use spaces around operators for better code clarity.
Naming conventions: Adopt meaningful naming conventions to enhance code readability. Use camelCase for variables and functions (e.g., myVariable, calculateTotal()) and PascalCase for class names (e.g., MyClass).
Braces and control structures: Always use braces ({ }) for all control structures, even if they contain a single code line. Indent the content within the braces for consistency.
Semicolons: Include semicolons at the end of each statement, even though JavaScript allows omitting them in some instances. This ensures code safety and avoids potential issues.
Comments: Use comments to explain non-obvious sections of code, but avoid over-commenting simple code. Maintain a balance to keep code documentation concise and helpful.
Function declarations: Prefer function expressions or function declarations unless hoisting is necessary. For concise, one-liner functions or when lexical this functionality is required, consider using arrow functions.
Variable usage: Minimize naming conflicts and unintended interactions by limiting the use of global variables. Employ module patterns or JavaScript modules to encapsulate your code and restrict variable scope.
'use strict': Start your scripts or functions with 'use strict' to enforce strict mode and catch common coding mistakes.
Team consistency: Maintain consistent formatting practices within your development team or project. Create and follow a coding style guide to ensure everyone is on the same page.
Unit testing: Implement unit tests using testing frameworks like Jest or Mocha to ensure code correctness, prevent regressions, and enhance code quality.
Python Coding Guidelines

When it comes to coding in Python, some guidelines prioritize code readability and maintainability. Let's delve into these guidelines further:

Indentation: Use four spaces for indentation and keep line lengths around 79 characters for readability. If a line exceeds this limit, consider breaking it into two lines.
Naming conventions: Follow naming conventions such as using lowercase with underscores (snake_case) for variables and functions UPPERCASE_WITH_UNDERSCORES for constants and CapitalizedWords (CamelCase) for class names.
Whitespace: Utilize lines to separate functions, classes, and larger code blocks. Maintain spacing around operators and commas.
Comments: Adding comments can help explain obvious code behavior or provide clarifications. Additionally, it is recommended to use docstrings to document functions, classes, and modules.
Function and method definitions: It is beneficial to use descriptive names for functions while documenting their behavior using docstrings. Keeping functions concise is also important.
Class definitions: Opt for class names without underscores while providing descriptive docstrings for class descriptions.
Error handling: Use exception types and provide meaningful error messages when handling exceptions.
Additional recommendations: Use list comprehensions to write concise and efficient code, avoid nested loops, and prioritize writing flat rather than deeply nested code.
Ruby Coding Guidelines

In Ruby, there are no strict rules, but the community follows certain conventions and best practices. Here are some important rules to follow when writing Ruby code:

Indentation and formatting: Use two spaces for each indentation level and UNIX-style line endings. Keep lines between 80 to 100 characters for better readability.
Naming conventions: When naming methods, use snake_case (e.g., user_name, calculate_total). For class and module names, use CamelCase (e.g., User, ApiClient). When defining constants, use SCREAMING_SNAKE_CASE (e.g., MAX_ATTEMPTS, DEFAULT_PORT).
Whitespace: After commas, colons, and semicolons, leave one space. Use blank lines to separate different logical parts of your code.
Parentheses and braces: Avoid using parentheses when calling methods without arguments. Use braces { } for hash literals when using symbol keys (Ruby 1.9 and later). For multi-line blocks, use do...end, and for single-line blocks, use {...}.
Comments: Include comments to explain complex parts of your code or logic. Avoid redundant comments that state the obvious.
Method definitions: Keep your methods short and focused on a single task. Use descriptive names for your methods.
Error handling: Use exceptions to handle errors and exceptional cases, but don't use exceptions for normal flow control.
String quoting: Use single quotes for strings that don't need interpolation or special characters. Use double quotes when you need interpolation or escape sequences.
Enumerable methods: Make use of methods like map, reduce, and select when working with collections. Minimize the use of unnecessary variables.
Ruby style guide tools: Consider using static code analysis tools like RuboCop to automatically help you follow these Ruby style guidelines.
Testing and documentation: Write unit tests using testing frameworks like RSpec or Minitest. Provide inline documentation for your methods and classes using built-in Ruby comments or tools like YARD.
PHP Coding Guidelines

PHP coding standards play a role in ensuring that code remains consistent, readable, and easily manageable. Let's dive into some guidelines:

PSR standards: The PHP community has established PHP Standards Recommendations (PSR) as guidelines encompassing coding principles, coding style conventions, and autoloading practices. Adhering to PSR standards like PSR 1 (Basic Coding Standard) and PSR 2 (Coding Style Guide) ensures code consistency and readability.
Indentation and formatting: Consistency in indentation is vital for code readability. Use four spaces for indentation and avoid mixing spaces with tabs to prevent inconsistencies.
Line breaks: Enclose code blocks within braces () for clarity in single-line statements. Opening braces should be placed on the same line as the control structure while closing braces should be on a new line.
Line length: Keep line lengths within 80 to 100 characters to prevent scrolling and enhance code legibility.
Descriptive naming: Use meaningful names when defining variables, functions, classes, and methods to create self-explanatory code.
Comments: Use comments to explain logic or non-obvious code sections, but avoid excessive comments.
Method length: Keep functions and methods concise, focusing on accomplishing specific tasks. Consider breaking down longer functions into smaller, more manageable parts.
Error handling: Properly handle errors by providing error messages for effective debugging. Avoid using the "@" operator to suppress errors, as it can conceal issues.
Whitespace usage: Use whitespace strategically to separate code sections and enhance code readability. Insert blank lines to visually distinguish distinct parts of your code.
Naming convention: Choose and consistently adhere to a naming convention (e.g., camelCase or snake_case) throughout your codebase.
Variable usage: Minimize the use of variables and consider controlling scope through techniques like dependency injection or encapsulation.
Security considerations: Prevent vulnerabilities like SQL injection and XSS attacks by validating and sanitizing user input.
Dependency management: Leverage Composer, the PHP package manager, to simplify managing project dependencies and adhere to autoloading standards like PSR 4.
Version control: Use version control systems like Git to track code changes and facilitate collaboration among developers.
Testing: Incorporate a testing framework like PHPUnit to ensure code correctness, identify bugs, and facilitate code modifications.
Go Coding Guidelines

When writing code in Go, following the Go style guide is important for consistency and readability.

Formatting: Use tabs for indentation, and try to keep your lines under 80 characters. If you really need to, you can extend them up to 120 characters. When naming functions and variables, use camelCase (e.g., myFunction, myVariable), and for type names, use PascalCase (e.g., MyType). Also, capitalize initialisms like HTTP and URL.
Importing packages: When importing packages, organize them into three sections: standard library packages, third-party packages, and local packages. Make sure to group them and separate each section with a blank line.
Package structure: When structuring your package, give them names that accurately describe their purpose. Avoid generic names like "common" or "util."
Comments: Use comments to explain what your code is doing and why. Document any functions, types, and variables meant to be used outside the package. Write complete sentences in your comments.
Function design: Keep your functions focused on specific tasks. Use clear parameter names to make your code easier to understand. Avoid chaining methods excessively to maintain clarity.
Error handling: For handling errors, explicitly return error values using the error type, except for truly exceptional situations.
Interfaces: When designing interfaces, try to have them with single methods whenever possible. Focus on defining behavior rather than implementation details.
Unit testing: Writing unit tests is crucial to ensure the quality of your code. Place your test files in the same package with a "_test" suffix and use Go's built-in testing package (testing). Follow the convention of prefixing test functions with "Test."
Concurrency: If you need to work with concurrency, use Channels. For more complex synchronization requirements, consider using the sync package.
Code formatting: To maintain code formatting in your Go projects, utilize gofmt, a built-in formatting tool provided by Go itself.
Swift Coding Guidelines

When writing code in the Swift language, it's essential to follow coding guidelines that make your code clean, easy to read, and maintainable. Here are some standard practices to consider:

Naming conventions: Use names for variables, functions, and classes that make sense and describe their purpose. Start class and struct names with an uppercase letter (e.g., MyClass). Begin function and method names with a lowercase letter (e.g., myVariable, myFunction). When using acronyms, use uppercase letters (e.g., URL, HTTPRequest). Try to avoid abbreviations unless they are widely understood.
Spacing: Use four spaces for indentation to keep your code neatly aligned. Add spaces to make your code more readable around keywords, parentheses, braces, and operators. Align braces vertically and place opening braces on the same line as the declaration.
Comments: Use comments to explain code sections or provide context, but aim for self-explanatory code to reduce the need for excessive comments. Avoid keeping commented-out code in the final production version.
Function and method design: Keep your functions and methods focused and concise, following the Single Responsibility Principle. Use clear parameter names that describe each argument's purpose. Prefer returning values instead of using out parameters and avoid excessive method chaining for clarity.
Use optionals: Use Swift's optional types when dealing with potentially absent values. Unwrap optionals using if let or guard let statements. Be cautious when using force unwrapping (!), and only do so when you are sure the value exists.
Error handling: Swift provides mechanisms like try, catch, and throw for error handling, which should be preferred over other techniques. If needed, create custom error types for handling specific errors. Handle errors at an appropriate level and address specific errors as necessary.
Memory management: Swift uses Automatic Reference Counting (ARC) for memory management. Consider using value types (struct) to reduce the overhead caused by reference counting. Be cautious about reference cycles with reference types (class) and use weak or unowned references when necessary.
Swift features: Make the most of Swift's features, such as optionals, generics, protocols, closures, and functional programming concepts. Leverage Swift's type inference for code that is both concise and clear. Follow Swift's API Design Guidelines for naming conventions and adopt a protocol-oriented programming approach.
Unit testing: Writing unit tests is crucial to ensure the correctness of your code. Utilize testing frameworks like XCTest or third-party libraries like Quick/Nimble. Aim for comprehensive code coverage by testing boundary cases and edge scenarios.
C# Coding Guidelines

When coding in C#, it is important to follow guidelines that improve the readability, maintainability, and consistency of your code. Here are some practiced techniques:

Naming conventions: Choose descriptive names for variables, functions, classes, and other elements. Use PascalCase for class and method names (for example, MyClass, MyMethod). Utilize camelCase for parameter names (for example, myVariable, myParameter). Capitalize constants (for example, MY_CONSTANT).
Indentation and formatting: Maintain indentation with four spaces. Place braces () on separate lines when working with control structures. Enhance readability by using whitespace to separate operators, keywords, and other elements. Keep line length within 80 to 120 characters.
Comments and documentation: Document classes, methods, properties, and parameters using XML comments. Write self-explanatory code to reduce the need for comments. Utilize comments to clarify complex or non-obvious code sections.
Error handling: Implement try-catch blocks to handle exceptions effectively and provide error messages. Avoid catching general exceptions unless necessary; instead, catch specific exceptions whenever possible.
Object Oriented Programming (OOP): Adhere to principles for designing maintainable and extensible classes. Clearly define interfaces and abstract classes to establish agreements. Encapsulate data and behavior within classes. Consider composition over inheritance when appropriate.
Coding style: Ensure casing of keywords such as if, for, return. Avoid the use of abbreviations in your code. Follow the conventions and use idioms specific to your programming language.
Testing: Write unit tests to verify the correctness of your code. Utilize testing frameworks like NUnit or xUnit for testing. Strive for test coverage, including boundary and edge cases.
C++ Coding Guidelines

Now, let's talk about C++ guidelines that promote code consistency, readability, and maintainability. Here are some accepted practices.

Naming conventions: Choose meaningful names that accurately reflect variables, functions, and entities in your codebase. Throughout your project, adhere to a naming convention like camelCase or underscore_case. Avoid using keywords as identifiers whenever possible.
Indentation and formatting: Maintain a consistent indentation pattern using either spaces or tabs. Follow a code formatting style across your entire project. For single-line statements, use braces { } to denote code blocks.
Comments and documentation: It is important to include comments in your code to explain the purpose of sections. Ensure you document function signatures, class definitions, and significant design decisions. Consider using documentation generation tools like Doxygen to automate the creation of documentation.
Functions and methods: Keep functions and methods focused on a responsibility. Use descriptive names for your functions and methods. Try to limit the number of function arguments to three or fewer.
Classes and objects: To maintain encapsulation, keep member variables private and provide public methods for access and modification. Follow the Single Responsibility Principle (SRP) to ensure the purpose of your classes. Make use of initialization lists in constructors to initialize member variables effectively.
Error handling: Exceptions should be explicitly used for error scenarios rather than relying solely on return codes. Handle exceptions appropriately by providing error messages and performing necessary cleanup operations.
Memory management: Automatic memory management with RAII (Resource Acquisition Is Initialization) is preferred over memory handling. Utilize pointers such as unique_ptr or shared_ptr to manage ownership effectively and avoid manual memory allocation/deallocation.
Naming conventions for macros: When defining macros, use uppercase letters with underscores to distinguish them from other elements in your codebase. Whenever possible, try to avoid macros. Instead, consider using const variables or inline functions as alternatives.
Preprocessor directives: Minimize the usage of preprocessor directives such as #ifdef or #define where possible. Ensure you include guards (#ifndef, #define, #endif) in your header files to prevent inclusions. Pay attention to compiler warnings, as they can help you detect issues. Consider using tools like Clang Tidy or cppcheck for static analysis. These tools can help you identify bugs, performance problems, and coding style violations.
C Coding Guidelines

In C programming, it is important to follow coding guidelines to improve code readability, maintainability, and consistency. While specific practices may vary, here are some guidelines for C programming:

Naming conventions: Give your variables, functions, and classes names that make sense and describe what they do. For variables and functions, use camelCase (e.g., myVariable, calculateValue()). For class names, use PascalCase (e.g., MyClass, MyException). When you have constants, write them in uppercase (e.g., const int MAX_VALUE = 100).
Formatting: Make sure your code is easily read using consistent indentation, typically four spaces. Always use braces ({ }) for control flow statements like if, for, and while, even if the block contains just one line of code. Add spaces around operators and after commas to make your code clearer.
Comments: Use comments to explain complicated parts of your code that might not be immediately obvious.
Documentation: To document your code properly, consider using Doxygen-style comments, especially for classes, methods, and public interfaces. This helps other developers understand what each part of your code does.
Single responsibility principle: When you're designing functions and classes, remember the single responsibility principle. It means each function or class should have a specific purpose. Keeping them a manageable size also makes your code easier to read.
Error handling: For handling errors and exceptional situations, you can use exceptions. Handling exceptions is essential to prevent unexpected problems.
Memory management: To simplify memory management, follow RAII principles, which means that resources like memory allocation and deallocation should be tied to object lifetimes. Smart pointers like unique_ptr and shared_ptr can help manage memory automatically, reducing the need for manual intervention.
Macros: If you use macros in your code, name them in uppercase with underscores to distinguish them from other elements. However, try to use macros sparingly and consider using const variables or inline functions instead.
Preprocessor macros: Limit the use of preprocessor macros (#ifdef, #define) as much as possible. Include guards (#ifndef, #define, #endif) can help prevent header file inclusions and ensure proper compilation.
Unit testing: Developing unit tests is essential to verify that your code works correctly. Consider using testing frameworks, especially for C programming, to test various cases and scenarios thoroughly.
Version control: When managing your code, using version control systems like Git is highly recommended. They offer benefits like tracking changes and facilitating collaboration with other developers.
Resistance to Coding Standards
Resisting coding standards isn't exactly rare in the software development field. Devs can have reasons for pushing back on these rules, like

Personal coding style: They have their own style, and coders might instead use what they know and find it tough to follow some standardized stuff. They may say their way works better or makes more sense to them.
Lack of understanding: Some devs might fight standards because they don't fully understand the point or how they could help. They see these as extra limits that just slow them down.
Time constraints: In tight deadlines, adhering to strict coding standards can pose challenges. Project managers often emphasize perfection, and while following these rules is essential, it can be a source of tension. Developers may feel that their creativity and focus on functionality take a back seat when code standards are closely monitored.
Autonomy and creativity: Coding is creative, and everyone has got their own style. Devs don't need anyone questioning their coding style or asking why they did something one way versus another.
Inconsistent enforcement: Inconsistent enforcement can tick developers off. If some coders get away with ignoring style rules, but others don't, it feels arbitrary. Pretty soon, the whole team starts blowing off the guidelines since they seem pointless, and selective rule enforcement fails because developers won't follow what looks unfair or random.
This resistance to inconsistent standards defeats the purpose of having coding rules. So, when bringing in coding standards, they have to apply to everybody. Exceptions make the guidelines look weak and ineffective. Therefore, consistent expectations are key for adoption.

Note
Note : Perform web and app testing on the cloud grid. Try LambdaTest Now!

How Testing Improves Your Code Quality?
Testing is like double-checking that your code does what it's supposed to and matches your project's requirements and plans. You can test your code in various ways and at different points in your development journey, like checking individual parts (unit testing), making sure everything fits together (integration testing), ensuring it all functions correctly (functional testing), or confirming it meets user expectations (acceptance testing).

Depending on how intricate and extensive your code is, you can test it either in a manual or automated way. When it comes to testing, cloud-based platforms offer significant advantages in terms of flexibility, scalability, and collaboration, contributing to improving code quality.

One such cloud testing platform is LambdaTest. It is an AI-powered test orchestration and execution platform that lets you test code for web or mobile apps across various browsers, devices, and operating system combinations. With LambdaTest automation cloud of 3000+ desktop and mobile environments, you can ensure seamless web and mobile experiences.Looking to start with LambdaTest, check out the documentation - Getting Started with Automation testing on LambdaTest.

You can also refer to the below tutorial to get started with LambdaTest.

Dive into the tutorial below to learn the clean coding best practices for your test automation needs.

Part I:



Part II:



Subscribe to our LambdaTest YouTube Channel for the latest updates on tutorials around Selenium testing, Cypress testing, and more.

Best Practices for Implementing Coding Standards
Coding standards aren't meant to control developers. They're supposed to help teams work better and faster together. When everyone follows the same rules, it gets easier to read each other's code and standards, making finding and fixing bugs simpler. However, some developers prefer to avoid being told what to do.

Of course, you'll get some pushback at first. But keep communicating the reasons and give them time. Once they experience the advantages, most developers will embrace standards. They make life easier for everyone.

Establish clear coding standards: When it comes to coding, having clear standards in place can help streamline things for the whole team. Put together a set of guidelines outlining how the code should be formatted, what naming conventions to use, expectations around comments and documentation, logical code structure, and any coding best practices. Document all this clearly so it's available as a handy reference.
Utilize automated code analysis tools: Automated code analysis tools are also helpful for catching issues early on. Integrate those into the workflow so they can scan the codebase and flag any parts that don't adhere to the standards, and this gives developers instant feedback they can use to fix things quickly. Having that extra automation makes it easier to keep everything consistent.
Incorporate coding standard checks into CI/CD pipelines: Adding automatic coding standard checks into CI/CD pipelines is a good idea. This way, any new code gets validated against the standards before it gets merged into the main code.
Enforce code reviews: Code reviews should also happen. People reviewing the code need to check that it works right and follows the coding rules. Using a checklist during reviews helps catch issues.
Utilize code review tools: Using code review tools is a good idea. They can spot problems with coding standards automatically while people are reviewing things. This helps the reviewers find issues more easily.
Encourage discussions on coding standards: It's also good to have regular talks with the dev team about coding standards, and these chats could happen in team meetings or on a platform of your choice.
Cultivate flexibility and collaboration: When it comes to coding standards, it can be tricky to find the right balance. On the one hand, having consistent standards makes life easier for the whole dev team. But at the same time, you don't want to suffocate people by being too strict or rigid.
The key is to get developers involved in actually defining the standards. Let them chime in with their ideas and preferences within reason. Hold a brainstorming session and have an open discussion about what standards would work best for your team.

That way, the standards feel less imposed from above and more owned by the whole group. People will be more likely to follow them if they have a say in creating them. And you might end up with some standards you never would've thought of yourself.


Provide training and onboarding: The other big thing is proper onboarding and training when you bring on new team members. Make sure to walk them through the coding standards thoroughly when they start. Explain why they matter for your organization specifically. It'll sink in more if they understand the reasoning behind everything.
And don't just hand them a massive document of standards and expect them to internalize it all immediately. Keep things friendly and conversational as you explain it all. Make sure they feel comfortable asking questions if anything is unclear.


Lead by example: Team leads, and senior developers should serve as role models by consistently adhering to coding. When the team members see how their leaders roll, they'll be more into doing things the standard way.
Offer feedback and mentorship: Even if some devs keep messing up the standards, take time to give them constructive feedback. Be a mentor - help them level up their skills. It's not about shaming anyone but about improving the whole team.
Recognize adherence to coding standards: When someone takes the time to follow the standards we set up, it's good to show them you notice and appreciate it. That's how you get code that makes sense to everyone working on it. It's just a little thing that unifies the team and gets the product out the door.
Conclusion
Coding standards and guidelines are super crucial for software developers today. They help keep everything consistent, readable, and maintainable so the code runs smoothly.

The standards have to work for the specific developers and projects, though. What makes sense for one team might only work for one team. The standards should change over time, too, as people give feedback and learn more, and it's vital that everyone on the team knows about the standards and follows them.

Using tools to check code automatically can help ensure they adhere to the guidelines. Doing code reviews is another good way to keep the standards going. By making coding standards part of the development process, teams can make great software and set their projects up for long-term success.

...
On This Page

Overview
What are Coding Standards and Guidelines
Key Aspects
Advantages
Coding Standards and Guidelines
Coding Standards for Programming Languages
Resistance to Coding Standards
How Testing Improves Your Code Quality
Best Practices
Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
Signup for free
Frequently asked questions
General...
What is a good coding standard?
Are coding standards important?
Author's ProfileGradient

Veethee Dixit

Veethee Dixit is a Computer Science Engineer by degree and a passionate writer by choice. Credit for her profession as a web content writer goes to her knack for writing combined with a technical background. You can also follow her on Twitter.

Hubs: 28

...
Twitter
Linkedin
Reviewer's ProfileGradient

Salman Khan

Salman works as a Product Marketing Manager at LambdaTest. With over four years in the software testing domain, he brings a wealth of experience to his role of reviewing blogs, learning hubs, product updates, and documentation write-ups. Holding a Master's degree (M.Tech) in Computer Science, Salman's expertise extends to various areas including web development, software testing (including automation testing and mobile app testing), CSS, and more.

...
Twitter
Linkedin
Did you find this page helpful?

Helpful

NotHelpful

Start Free Testing ->
More Related Hubs
Automation Testing
14 Chapters

Automation Testing
The quintessential guide to Automation Testing. This is an in-depth resource covering all aspects of testing.

Selenium Python
27 Chapters

Selenium Python
Want to learn automation testing with Python? Check out our step-by-step tutorial on Python with examples!

Selenium Locators
12 Chapters

Selenium Locators
Here we explore different types of Selenium locators and learn how they are used with different automation testing.

Selenium NUnit
9 Chapters

Selenium NUnit
Isn’t it better to use an effective test framework like NUnit on a powerful and scalable Selenium Grid?

Selenium WebdriverIO
10 Chapters

Selenium WebdriverIO
Through this guide, we will learn how to use WebdriverIO, a next-gen test automation framework for Node.js.

Selenium C#
8 Chapters

Selenium C#
This tutorial will teach how to master Selenium, making your test automation more streamlined and efficient.

Automation Testing
14 Chapters

Automation Testing
The quintessential guide to Automation Testing. This is an in-depth resource covering all aspects of testing.

Selenium Python
27 Chapters

Selenium Python
Want to learn automation testing with Python? Check out our step-by-step tutorial on Python with examples!

Selenium Locators
12 Chapters

Selenium Locators
Here we explore different types of Selenium locators and learn how they are used with different automation testing.

Selenium NUnit
9 Chapters

Selenium NUnit
Isn’t it better to use an effective test framework like NUnit on a powerful and scalable Selenium Grid?

Selenium WebdriverIO
10 Chapters

Selenium WebdriverIO
Through this guide, we will learn how to use WebdriverIO, a next-gen test automation framework for Node.js.

Selenium C#
8 Chapters

Selenium C#
This tutorial will teach how to master Selenium, making your test automation more streamlined and efficient.

Automation Testing
14 Chapters

Automation Testing
The quintessential guide to Automation Testing. This is an in-depth resource covering all aspects of testing.

Selenium Python
27 Chapters

Selenium Python
Want to learn automation testing with Python? Check out our step-by-step tutorial on Python with examples!

Selenium Locators
12 Chapters

Selenium Locators
Here we explore different types of Selenium locators and learn how they are used with different automation testing.

Selenium NUnit
9 Chapters

Selenium NUnit
Isn’t it better to use an effective test framework like NUnit on a powerful and scalable Selenium Grid?

Selenium WebdriverIO
10 Chapters

Selenium WebdriverIO
Through this guide, we will learn how to use WebdriverIO, a next-gen test automation framework for Node.js.

Selenium C#
8 Chapters

Selenium C#
This tutorial will teach how to master Selenium, making your test automation more streamlined and efficient.

left arrow
right arrow
ShadowLT Logo
Start your journey with LambdaTest
Get 100 minutes of automation test minutes FREE!!

Signup for free
Book a Demo
Products & Features
Automation Testing Cloud
KaneAI - Testing AgentKane AI
Cross Browser Testing
Real Device Cloud
Test Manager
Mobile App Testing
AI-Powered Testing
HyperExecute
Performance Testing
LT Browser
LT Debug
Local Page Testing
Automated Screenshots
Geo-Location Testing
Accessibility Testing
Responsive Testing
Localization Testing
Visual Regression Testing
Integrations
Test Analytics
Professional ServicesLambdatest Professional Services
Test on
iPhone 16Lambdatest Professional Services
List of Browsers
Internet Explorer
Firefox
Chrome
Safari Browser Online
Microsoft Edge
Opera
Yandex
Mac OS
Mobile Devices
iOS Simulator
Android Emulator
Browser Emulator
Browser Automation
Selenium Testing
Selenium Grid
Cypress Testing
Playwright Testing
Puppeteer Testing
Taiko Testing
Mobile App Automation
Appium Testing
Espresso Testing
XCUITest Testing
Resources
TestMu Conf 2025TestMu Conference 2025
Join LambdaTest Bootcamp
Blogs
Community
Certifications
Product Updates
Newsletter
Webinars
Videos
FAQ
Web Technologies Compatibility
Automation Testing Advisor
Software Testing [Glossary]
Free Online Tools
Mobile Testing Advisor
Sitemap
Status
Company
About Us
CareersLambdaTest Career
Customers
Press
AchievementsLambdaTest Achievements
Reviews
Community & Support
Partners
Open Source
Content Editorial Policy
Write for Us
Become an Affiliate
Terms of Service
Privacy Policy
Trust
Team
Contact Us
Learning Hub
Selenium Tutorial
Cypress Tutorial
Playwright Tutorial
Appium Tutorial
Jest Tutorial
More Learning Hubs
What's New
Changelog
Webinar:Achieving Continuous Quality Through People, Process, Tools and Culture
Future of QA Survey Report
Test on iPhone 16Lambdatest Professional Services
Test on Samsung Galaxy S24 Series
November'24 Updates
Coding Jag - Issue 226
Transavia [Case Study]
Python Automation Testing With Examples [Blog]
Exception Handling in Cypress [Hub]
Espresso 101 [Certification]
LambdaTest Logo
Deliver unparalleled digital experience with our Next-Gen, AI-powered testing cloud platform. Ensure exceptional user experience across all devices and browsers.

...
Start free with Google
Start free with Email
LambdaTest is #1 choice for SMBs and Enterprises across the globe.
G2-2023Getappleadersoftwareadviceleaderleader
LambdaTest has formal standards certification and comply in line with acts and regulations across the globe.
HIPPAGDPRAICPACSACCPABSIBSIBSI
© 2025 LambdaTest. All rights reserved
Cross Browser Testing Cloud Built WithLoveFor Testers
Like Lambdatest on Facebook
LambdaTest Twitter
Follow LambdaTest on Linkedin
Subscribe LambdaTest on Youtube
GitHub
Pinterest
Glassdoor
Beta
0 / 10
used queries
×
×
×
×

Engineering

10 Coding Best Practices You Need to Know
All
Academy
Consulting
Design
Engineering
Life at Wizeline
Coding best practices include writing readable code, being consistent, and saving everything to version control – along with collaborating with your team and enjoying what you’re doing. Check out these 10 coding best practices that will set you up for success!
1. Don’t reinvent the wheel
When considering the requirements for your project, ask yourself questions about the features. Helpful questions to ask and answer early on include: Is this feature really necessary? Who benefits from this? Has someone else in my organization, a third party, or even an open code repository already coded a similar solution? 

 


 
2. Make sure your code is readable
Instead of focusing on optimization, prioritize making your code readable. Readable code is understandable code, and understandable code can be more easily integrated to promote greater efficiency in the project as a whole. 

3. Comment and document
Start each function or method you create with a comment. In this comment, you can outline exactly what the function or method does, what its parameters are, and what it returns. You’ll also want to describe any possible errors or exceptions. 



4. Stay DRY
Remember the DRY principle: Don’t Repeat Yourself. This principle states: “Every piece of knowledge must have a single, unambiguous, authoritative representation within a system.” This is also sometimes known as DIE, or Duplication Is Evil. In other words, the same piece of code should never be repeated over and over. 

5. Test your code
Tests are a form of documentation. They tell you how the code is supposed to act. Continuous testing helps to provide meaningful feedback to developers. From there, developers can quickly address any issues and make the necessary changes. 


6. Remember that consistency is key
When coding, it’s important to do similar tasks in a similar fashion each time. When you’re developing a new routine with a functionality that closely matches an existing routine, use a comparable name, parameter order, and structure for the code body. Another way to keep your code consistent is to follow the conventions of your coding framework. 

 

7. Keep it simple
Strive to always produce code that is simple, readable, and straightforward. Complex code increases the likelihood of bugs and mistakes. So, try to make your code do only what it needs to do and nothing more. Keep your design focused on the project’s current needs. 


8. Make your code portable and readable
Your code should always be able to function across platforms and frameworks. Thus, it’s wise to store the program’s messages away from the code. Further, you should never hard-code certain cultural conventions, like the format for dates.   

Additionally, your code must be buildable. If it can’t be distributed, it’s not optimal. Use an automation tool that allows you to build your code into a form that’s ready for distribution and can be tested quickly. 

 

9. Take advantage of version control
With version control, developers can work concurrently on the same set of files. It also allows you to restore previous versions of your code (in case it breaks) and to track the history of changes made to the code. 


10. Collaborate
You’re part of a team, and you all share a common goal – ideally, to create the highest quality product in the shortest amount of time. Thus, it’s not beneficial for you to work alone. Instead, strive to work together with your teammates. 

Communicate consistently, and make a point to regularly share your progress and ideas with your team. Collaboration among teammates often leads to new and better approaches and solutions.

 

A Bonus Coding Best Practice: Have Fun!!

 

As a developer, you will surely spend countless hours writing code, so why not have fun in the process? Try to work on projects that are interesting to you, or at least find an enjoyable piece of each project to focus on.



References
https://www.thinkful.com/blog/coding-best-practices/
https://code.tutsplus.com/tutorials/top-15-best-practices-for-writing-super-readable-code–net-8118
https://www.browserstack.com/guide/coding-standards-best-practices
Ana Cristina González Villicaña
Posted by Ana Cristina González Villicaña on June 17, 2021

Recommended for You

Engineering
Medellín Cityjs 2024: Lessons In Javascript’s Adaptability From The Experts

Academy Engineering
Wizeline and Google Cloud Team Up to Train African Engineers in Data Engineering Using GCP Technologies

Engineering
Humans of Wizeline: Karina García Ponce

Engineering
Accelerating AI Deployment with MLOps, Generative AI Models, and LlamaIndex
Careers
Life at Wizeline
Open Roles
Offerings
AI.R +
WIZEStudios
Human-Centric Experiences
Digital Core
Intelligence Everywhere
Adaptive Organizations
Future Now
Services
Design
Product Engineering
Cloud & DevOps
Data & AI
Product Evolution
Security
Technical Writing
Quality Assurance
Insights
Case Studies
Blog
Guides & Research
White Papers
About
About Us
Leadership
Diversity & Inclusion
Locations
Newsroom
Brand
AI Manifesto
Follow Us

Cookie Notice
Privacy Policy
Terms & Conditions
Security and Compliance
© Copyright Wizeline 2025

Beta
0 / 10
used queries
Enjoy up to 16% discount on our subscription plans. Get Started


Explore

Pricing

For Business

Resources

Search
⌘ K

Log In
Join
 for free
Home
/
Blog
/
Learn to Code
/
6 coding best practices for beginner programmers
6 coding best practices for beginner programmers
7 min read
Feb 26, 2024
content
Learn to code today.
Why you should use coding best practices
6 coding best practices for beginner programmers
1. Code indentation
2. Meaningful naming
3. Comments that add context
4. Don’t repeat yourself
5. Low coupling and high cohesion
6. Consider your context
Learn to code today.
Wrapping up and next steps
Continue learning about coding
Become a Software Engineer in Months, Not Years

From your first line of code, to your first day on the job — Educative has you covered. Join 2M+ developers learning in-demand programming skills.

Start Learning for Free
Code is written once. Then it’s read, debugged, refactored, and scaled constantly. How you learn code and write it will help you maintain and scale the application later down the road. We’re frequently under the pressure of deadlines in software development. Regardless, it’s important to use coding best practices to help ensure better quality code for yourself and for anyone who may have to extend that code in the future.

Today, we’ll discuss the importance of using coding best practices, and six best practices you should know as a beginner programmer.

Learn to code today.
Try one of our courses on programming fundamentals:

Learn Python
Learn C++
Learn C#
Learn Java
Learn JavaScript
Learn Ruby
Why you should use coding best practices
As a coder, developing a coding style that’s mindful of these best practices will make it easier to extend and debug the code in the future. Even if you’re no longer working with that codebase, the legacy of your work will affect the community of developers who work with that code in the future.

Coding best practices help ensure code quality and codebase health. Using good practices when writing code will support the characteristics of good code, that is: Maintainability, scalability, readability, and portability.

Code is written once and read thousands of times.

Some good coding practices, such as commenting, don’t affect the functionality of a program. However, they do impact the experience for the humans who’ll be reading and maintaining that code. You may be able to get your program to execute, but if you don’t implement best practices, a quickly done task can backfire by creating confusion and problems in the future. Writing good code now will help ease the processes of code reviews, unit tests, and refactoring.

6 coding best practices for beginner programmers
1. Code indentation
Proper indentation is the most important thing you can do to ensure that your code is readable and easy to understand. There are many different indentation styles, such as K&R, OTBS, and Stroustrup. These styles all advise that we add spaces and new lines in our code, so that each block of code is readily identifiable.

Consider the following code example:

C++

main.cpp
Ace Editor
 

Run
This code example lacks proper indentation, making it hard to understand.
You can see that the code works without any errors and even produces correct results. However, even for an expert programmer, it’s difficult to identify the boundaries of functions, loops, and conditional blocks without proper indentation.

In the following example, we rewrite this code with proper indentation. It becomes much easier to understand.

C++

main.cpp
#include <stdio.h>
int find(int A[], int size) {
   int ret = -1;
   for (int i = 0; i < size; i++) {
       if (A[i] > ret) {
           ret = A[i];
       }
   }
   return ret;
}
 
int main() {
   int A[] = {1, 4, 7, 13, 99, 0, 8, 5};
   printf("\n\n\t%d\n\n", find(A, 8));
   return 0;
}

Run
An example of code with proper indentation (Stroustrup style).
2. Meaningful naming
Your code’s variable names and function names should be intuitive. Ideally, we should be able to guess what a function does based on the function’s name.

You should give intuitive names to objects, variables, classes, functions, and constants. However, we also strive to keep our code concise and readable. If the most intuitive name is too long to keep code concise, you’re welcome to use its shorthand. Just be mindful that the shorthand should remain intuitive as well.

The following example of code does not follow meaningful naming conventions. This makes it difficult to understand and reuse.

C++

main.cpp
#include <stdio.h>
 
int find(int A[], int size) {
   int ret = -1;
   for (int i = 0; i < size; i++) {
       if (A[i] > ret) {
           ret = A[i];
       }
   }
   return ret;
}
int main() {
   int A[]={1, 4, 7, 13, 99, 0, 8, 5};
   printf("\n\n\t%d\n\n", find(A, 8));
   return 0;
}

Run
An example of code that lacks meaningful naming conventions.
In contrast, the following code example has the same functionality, but meaningful naming makes it easier to understand.

C++

main.cpp
#include <stdio.h>
 
int findLargest(int inputAry[], int inputArySize) {
   int largest = -1;
   for (int loop = 0; loop < inputArySize; loop++) {
       if (inputAry[loop] > largest) {
           largest = inputAry[loop];
       }
   }
   return largest;
}
 
int main() {
   int A[]={1, 4, 7, 13, 99, 0, 8, 5};
   printf("\n\n\t%d\n\n", findLargest(A, 8));
   return 0;
}

Run
An example of code with meaningful naming.
3. Comments that add context
Code is for the compiler, while comments are for coders.

Even if other best practices are accounted for, source code can’t always be self-explanatory. When code can’t explain itself, comments should step in. Here, good practices for writing stories apply to writing code: The more you anticipate your reader’s thoughts, the more impactful your comments will be.

Here are some general guidelines for code comments:

Prioritize quality over quantity: Don’t go commenting on every line of code. Comments should still support code readability. If your function name or variable name already infers what is happening, you don’t need to let readers know.

Don’t assume your reader has context: Let your readers know the context behind the code so they can understand why each part is necessary. If you’ve modified code to fix a bug, comments help keep that bug fixed.

Explain the “Why”: Don’t tell us what we can already see in the code. Explain the why behind it. We can see which method or function you’re using, but knowing why helps readers better understand the code.

Code commenting helps make codebases and projects more maintainable. When done well, good commenting can streamline code reviews. Comments also support developer onboarding by helping newcomers familiarize themselves more quickly with a codebase.

The following is an example of code commenting done well.

C++

main.cpp
#include <stdio.h>
 
/**
* Finds the largest integer from the given array (inputAry)
* of size (inputArySize).
*/
int findLargest(int inputAry[], int inputArySize) {
   //Assumption: array will have +ve elements.
   //Thus, the largest is initialized with -1 (smallest possible value).
  int largest = -1;
 
   // Iterate through all elements of the array.
  for (int loop = 0; loop < inputArySize; loop++) {
 
      //Replace largest with element greater than it.
      if (inputAry[loop] > largest) {
          largest = inputAry[loop];
      }
 
  }
  //returns the largest element of the array
  return largest;
}
 
int main() {
   int A[]={1, 4, 7, 13, 99, 0, 8, 5};
   printf("\n\n\t%d\n\n", findLargest(A, 8));
   return 0;
}

Run
An example of good code commenting.
4. Don’t repeat yourself
Also known as the DRY principle, “Don’t repeat yourself” strives to reduce code duplication. The idea here is that if you have code that’s doing the same thing twice, it should be made into a function. By abstracting code into functions, you can reuse that code and make development more efficient. In addition, avoiding code duplication makes debugging easier, as you won’t have to fix a bug in every instance of repeated code throughout your program.

5. Low coupling and high cohesion
Low coupling and high cohesion are different yet complementary principles. Low coupling encourages separation between unrelated parts of a codebase, while high cohesion encourages integration between related parts of a codebase.



GOOD practice: Low coupling between unrelated units and high cohesion between related units.
They may sound like opposing principles, but low coupling and high cohesion work together to ensure the maintainability, scalability, and testability of our applications. High cohesion strives to keep a close relation between units that need to know about each other. When it’s time to extend code, we benefit from finding related code in the same places. On the other hand, low coupling strives to reduce dependencies between unrelated units.

If we don’t follow this best practice, we risk trending toward high coupling and low cohesion. This results in excessive dependencies, which has several negative impacts. One undesirable result is an increased vulnerability to bugs, as a bug in one unit will affect its dependent units as well.



This is NOT a good practice: Avoid high coupling between unrelated units and and low cohesion between related units.
Low coupling and high cohesion apply to how we treat any of our language constructs, from methods and classes to libraries and APIs. These good practices can be achieved through what are known as SOLID principles in object-oriented programming.

6. Consider your context
Coding guidelines vary across different contexts. Depending on your programming language, company, or industry, there may be different coding guidelines for naming conventions, coding style, indentation, and file structures. Be mindful of your project’s individual needs and honor those coding standards when you can.

Use your best judgment, and adjust to whatever your situation calls for.

It’s important to know good coding practices, but rules are simply generalizations without context. To be used well, they need your good judgment. Keeping all these principles in mind, you should follow your instincts as a programmer. There will be times where your context challenges a general principle, and you know your case best. This is what others mean when they say not to take these rules “pragmatically,” and we agree.

Learn to code today.
Try one of our courses on programming fundamentals:

Learn Python
Learn C++
Learn C#
Learn Java
Learn JavaScript
Learn Ruby
Wrapping up and next steps
Writing good code is essential to your success as a developer. By keeping these coding practices in mind, you can ensure that your code is easier to maintain, scale, and debug. The more you code, the better you’ll get at applying and adapting these practices across different languages and projects.

To master best practices while learning to code, check out Educative’s courses for absolute beginners. Available in six programming languages, these courses will help you understand the logic of programming and begin writing code. Start your journey today!

Learn Python
Learn C++
Learn C#
Learn Java
Learn JavaScript
Learn Ruby
Happy learning!

Continue learning about coding
Learn how to code: The beginner’s guide to coding and syntax
15 JavaScript tips: Best practices to simplify your code
8 tricks and best practices for improving your Ruby code
Frequently Asked Questions
What’s the best way to practice coding?
The best way to practice coding is by consistently working on real-world projects that challenge your skills, participating in coding challenges and hackathons to test your abilities under pressure, and contributing to open-source projects to gain collaborative experience and feedback from the programming community.

Written By:
Erica Vartanian




Join 2.5 million developers at
Explore the catalog
Free Resources

Learn in-demand tech skills in half the time

PRODUCTS
Mock Interview

New
Courses

Cloud Labs

Skill Paths

Projects

Assessments

TRENDING TOPICS
Learn to Code

Tech Interview Prep

Generative AI

Data Science

Machine Learning

GitHub Students Scholarship

Early Access Courses

Blind 75

Layoffs

Pricing
For Individuals

Try for Free

Gift a Subscription

CONTRIBUTE
Become an Author

Become an Affiliate

Earn Referral Credits

RESOURCES
Blog

Cheatsheets

Webinars

Answers

ABOUT US
Our Team

Careers

Hiring
Frequently Asked Questions

Contact Us

Press

LEGAL
Privacy Policy

Cookie Policy

Cookie Settings
Terms of Service

Business Terms of Service

Data Processing Agreement

INTERVIEW PREP COURSES
Grokking the Modern System Design Interview

Grokking the Product Architecture Design Interview

Grokking the Coding Interview Patterns

Machine Learning System Design

Copyright ©2025 Educative, Inc. All rights reserved.

soc2
Beta
0 / 10
used queries
1

ServiceNow
Community

Help
Select your country
Sign In
Join the Community
Product Hubs
Connect
Blogs
Resources
ServiceNow University

This blog
Search in this blog
 ServiceNow Community  Groups  ServiceNow User Groups SNUGS  SNUG APJ  Queensland SNUG  Blog  Coding Best Practices
Coding Best Practices
Jake Gillespie
 Jake Gillespie
Mega Guru
‎05-01-2017 04:00 PM
As a ServiceNow Technical Architect, I often need to write code to perform complex functionality within the platform that cannot be achieved through the available configuration methods. In addition to this, I also see a lot of code written by other Administrators, Consultants and Developers etc. To say that this code varies in style and complexity would be quite the understatement. While it is understandable that not everyone thinks the same way, the problem is the inconsistency throughout the code, and a general lack of understanding or knowledge of the ServiceNow Technical Best Practices.

In this multi part blog series, I'll seek to identify and explain some of the ServiceNow Technical Best Practices, as well as my own tips for writing reliable and reusable code, not to mention why they are important to follow. This article will focus on scripting in general, so if you haven't studied software development before, or are simply new to scripting, then stay tuned!

Use consistent styling

First and foremost, code should be indented consistently. Much like reading a book, developers learn to read (and write) code by knowing how the control (program flow) will branch based on conditions or loops etc. If code is not indented consistently, it becomes very difficult to understand what the code is doing, and therefore how to successfully modify it. By using indentation, you can avoid having to count how many open or close curly braces there are, when identifying which IF or FOR block the current line of code falls within. Trust me, it's easier! And, considering that ServiceNow offers a "Format Code" function as part of the Script field toolbar, you really have no excuses.

Know your data types

Many programming languages are non-negotiable when it comes to assigning values to Variables defined as a specific type, otherwise known as "Type Safety". JavaScript however is not one of those languages. JavaScript is actually very flexible and adaptive, which is good and bad. The good side of this is that JavaScript will sometimes fix an issue that you may have overlooked. But, the bad side of this is that it promotes a lack of discipline when writing code. Worse yet, if the bug is missed during the testing cycle, it could be published into your production code. The first symptom of a problem relating to data types is usually when a comparison between two values produces an unexpected result. So, my advice is that if you know what type of data you wish to store and compare, then always define your Variables as known types (Strings can be defined as "", Numbers as 0, Boolean as true/false etc.). This principle should also be considered when writing functions that return values. Those values should match the data type of the Variable they're being assigned to. If in doubt, convert the return value to the type you require. In JavaScript, you can use String(value) to convert a value to String or Number(value) to convert to a Number. For Booleans, simply convert the value to a String first, then compare to "true". This will return Boolean true if the value is actually true, else it will return Boolean false. This is particularly handy when transferring values via XML (e.g. via GlideAjax, SOAP or REST).

Avoid non-descriptive names or Variables and function names

Avoid using Variables with extremely short names, as it becomes more difficult to understand the purpose of the variable throughout the code. Exceptions to this rule include using single letter Integers for iterating through loops (e.g. i), although it is still advisable to describe these variables with some detail (especially when you have multiple loops in the same function). In addition to this, you should also avoid using extremely long names. Try to find some middle ground and give your Variables a name with purpose.

Use Objects

JavaScript might not be a full Class-based Object Oriented programming language, however it is Object-Oriented, so be sure to make full use of Objects. For those new to Objects, these are basically Variables with more Variables inside them. I often see code where separate Variables have been defined to store data that relates to the same entity (e.g. Information regarding a single user such as First Name, Last Name, Email etc.). It is far more efficient to store these values in an Object, which can easily be passed between functions. Objects can even be pushed into Arrays! If you need to convert an Object or Array to String format (a common practice when transferring data via AJAX, SOAP or REST, you can convert to JSON format. JSON is great because it will preserve your variables in their native JavaScript data types.

Keep it simple

Some developers will often try to condense their code into a few lines as possible, believing that this is more efficient, and this is certainly the case in some programming languages. However, in my experience using the ServiceNow platform, a few extra lines of code used to define additional Variables won't make a huge difference. For example, often times you will need to evaluate a number of conditions before branching your code based on the outcome. In ServiceNow, this often involves dot walking from the "current" object or calling functions from the API to return a value. If you add all of these into the condition of an IF block, it can become messy and difficult to understand, let alone debug. For this reason I will often simplify the overall condition by first retrieving each component as a true/false value, and storing them as Boolean Variables. Then I use these Variables in the condition block. If you need to debug an issue, simply add some log statements to display the value of each of these components. For complex logical operations, it would be better to move the logical processing to it's own function, and have that function return the overall result to your IF block.

Error trapping and preventing crashes

There are many reasons why your code can fail/crash, or produce undesired results. A major cause of this is when the developer has not considered all of the possible scenarios from a logical and technical point of view. A simple example is processing input from a user. If the code is expecting a number but the user enters some text, how will it react? If the developer assumed the value would always be a number, and therefore did not allow for any exceptions, the code will likely fail. Simply put, a piece of code can be modified to allow exception cases to exist without crashing the code. This is generally referred to as "error trapping", where the goal is to handle any exception cases without causing the code to crash. A simple solution to the above scenario would be to detect the undesirable input value and report an error message back to the user, rather than letting the code continue running and potentially fail. This simple principle of checking whether a value is within the nominal range, or the expected data type, can make all the difference. This also applies to values returned by functions called by your own code.

Commenting

Last but not least, you should always comment your code. Comments not only tell other developers what your code does (or at least what it was intended to do), they also tell you what your code does. Unless you have an exceptional memory, remembering exactly what each line of code does in a function you wrote 12 months earlier will likely be a challenge. As a wise developer once said, be kind to your future self and comment your code. This is not to say that every line of code requires a comment, but I do suggest commenting the following:

Groups of Variables or Objects (a single line describing what each group is for)
Functions (describe in a few lines the purpose of the function and what arguments or return values it uses)
IF blocks or FOR loops (describe the purpose of each)
In this article we've covered some of the basic principles of scripting best practices. In my next article, I'll discuss Client Script Best Practices and how they apply specifically to ServiceNow. For further information on the topics covered in this article, please see the following pages:

Coding Best Practices
Technical Best Practices
W3Schools: JavaScript Introduction
NOTE: MY POSTINGS REFLECT MY OWN VIEWS AND DO NOT NECESSARILY REPRESENT THE VIEWS OF MY EMPLOYER.

 6,272 Views
 You must be a registered user to add a comment. If you've already registered, sign in. Otherwise, register and sign in.

Comment
Popular Blog Posts

Cheers to 2024 and looking into 2025!
theme-lib.general.user-avatarby HenryDo •
ServiceNow Employee
119 Views
 Be the first to reply
1 helpfuls




ServiceNowThe world works with ServiceNow™
United States - Global
Terms and conditions
GDPR
Privacy statement
Your privacy choices
Cookie policy
Cookie Preferences
Sitemap
Business continuity
Accessibility
©️ 2025 ServiceNow. All rights reserved.

Beta
0 / 10
used queries
1

Skip to content

Talent
Companies
Schools
Why beecrowd
Login
Coding Best Practices
A good code is not one that is just functional, but also one that doesn't require unnecessary maintenance effort. For that reason, here are some good programming practices tips

Blog - Talent
January 20, 2022
 
 
 
A programmer’s life isn’t easy. Technology is something that never stops evolving and every day a different way of writing code appears. Therefore, a programmer must always be updated and attentive to new languages.

The code produced by a professional is his responsibility, therefore, a programmer must keep in mind that, when programming, he must always develop a “clean code”.

Good code is not just one that is functional, but also one that doesn’t require unnecessary maintenance effort. Most programmers don’t like to change poorly written code. This is something that brings a lot of frustration and often unnecessary rework. That’s why good programming practices are so important.

But then, what are good programming practices? They are a set of conventions to be able to make the code readable for both computers and humans, with the objective that maintenance and improvements can occur easily. Here in this text, you will find some tips to improve your good coding practices.

Writing a good code
A clean code should be:

1) Simple and easy to understand
2) Direct, without going around to reach your goal
3) Efficient and that does what is expected
4) Without duplication of what another piece of code already does
5) Elegantly written
6) Made with care because whoever made it was concerned about producing that code

To be able to develop a clean code you need to follow these steps:

Use meaningful names
Your code/method should have names that have some meaning in relation to their purpose and these names should answer the following questions:

– Why do they exist?

– What are you doing?

– How are they used?

Let’s imagine that a car engine system has a method called “run” instead of “accelerate”. If you get a code with that “run” name you will have to study the whole method to know what it does.

Indentation
Indentation means the way used to visually organize program blocks with indentations (made with tabs or spaces).

With indentation, the code gets cleaner, more readable and organized, but it doesn’t just serve to make the code more fluid. There are languages ,like Python and Haskell, that need indentation to define the hierarchy of code blocks, replacing markers like curly braces, { }, or words (begin/end, for example).

Modularization
If a code or a function takes up more than one screen space, it might be a good idea to modularize it.

Dividing the code into smaller functions and methods, organized into libraries, classes or packages (depending on the language), makes the code shorter, more organized and, above all, favors its reusability.

Formatting
The code formatting is important because it is part of code communication. Nobody would like to receive an encrypted letter where they must interpret what is written on it, the same happens when writing a code.

Another important aspect is that if you get well-structured code, you’re going to have the motivation to keep it well-structured. It is bad for any developer to have access to unformatted code, without indentation and to have to read it as if it were text without any punctuation.

Methods with related concepts should be vertically close together and the order of the methods should create a reading flow that improves code readability.

Comments
A code, possibly, will not just be in your hands. And even if that happens, after a while without touching it, you’re likely to forget some detail to get the expected result.

To avoid this, it is important to use comments. Of course, there’s no need to exaggerate the type of comment line by line, as obvious and excessive comments also hinder the flow of the code.

Comments should be used to briefly explain what your algorithm commands do. They also serve as a guide for a quick understanding of the program, making it easier to read the code.

Remember that comments only appear for programmer. Think about that when writing them.

Documentation
It is essential to document your work, describing the code specifications, because it is from the analysis of this documentation that anyone can understand how your program works, even if they do not have access to the source code.

Clarity
Your coding style should be clear and simple. For example, choose meaningful names for your variables and functions, make small functions that perform a well-defined task, avoid using global variables, modularize your code, and establish clear interfaces between modules. So, whoever reads your code will have no difficulty understanding what each snippet does.

Standardization
There are some documents that suggest coding standards for each of the languages.

Standardization is a good practice you should adopt when working alone, and it’s even more important when participating in a group project.

Avoid hungarian notation
Hungarian notation is intended to facilitate recognition of the type of a variable in a program by placing a suffix describing its type in its name. However, with the advent of new languages and automated tests, Hungarian notation becomes unnecessary.

Handling errors and exceptions
Don’t assume that the user will always provide the data perfectly or that the machine will never encounter exceptions. You need to analyze error and exception conditions, predicting them in the implementation of your code.

Error handling is the responsibility of the developer. It is necessary to guarantee that the code will have a treatment for each situation. Prefer to throw an exception instead of returning an error code. These returns clutter the method call and you can easily forget to check them.

Inside your method you can already see the error being returned and handle it right there. Define method flow separating business rules from errors or other situations. For your errors, create informational messages mentioning the operation that failed and the type of failure.

Try to use exceptions for unexpected situations, for example: your code is reading a file and the network became unavailable.

Table test
Table testing is a simple technique for testing your code and allows you to assess whether your program has any errors of logic. It works like this: you follow the flow of instructions and write down on a piece of paper, on your table (hence the name), the values of the variables.

With this test you can avoid several errors in your program.

Other tests
Testing your program is essential, because there is no point in writing code and not testing how it works. You can start by running it through a battery of tests to get an idea of how it behaves with different types of input.

Backup
Nothing in this world that involves computing can be done without backup. There are several ways to save your work. Today, a good example is the source code hosting platforms, such as Github and Gitlab, which do, by the way, version control of projects.

Never forget to have a backup!

It is important to consider that code is the way a team of developers will communicate. So, it must be very organized, explained, clear and well structured, only then will the result of the product be what the customer expects.

Do you like our content? So, follow us on social media to stay on top of innovation and read our blog.

Blog - Talent
 
 
 
CONTENT

Our Latest Articles
Read about the latest trends in technology
Qubika - Thumb - No Text
Thought Leadership
Unlocking LATAM Niche Talent: How beecrowd helped Qubika Hire Top Firmware Engineers
Qubika, a leader in technology innovation, partnered with beecrowd to tackle recruitment...
Read more
blog algo
Blog - Talent
Learning from Algorithm Analysis in Competitive Programming
Discover how algorithm analysis in competitive programming can improve your skills, optimize...
Read more
Argeniss - Thumb - No Text
Thought Leadership
Hiring Excellence to Deliver Quality: How Argeniss drives success with beecrowd’s Talent Solutions
Argeniss, a leading software development firm in Argentina, partnered with beecrowd to...
Read more
Check all content

Talent

Community
Compete and Learn
Find Jobs
Blog
Companies

Hire Tech Talent
Enterprises
Startups and SMBs
Explore Services
Thought Leadership
Schools

Boost Faculty Performance
LMS Integration
Blog
Why beecrowd

About Us
Case Studies
Social Responsibility
Contact us

I’m a Talent
I’m a Company
I’m a School
I’m Special
beecrowd © All rights reserved

Privacy Policy
Terms and Conditions
FERPA
Accessibility
       

Unlocking the Potencial of LATAM Tech Talent: Nearshoring Opportunities to Drive Innovation

Watch the 30-min webinar
Beta
0 / 10
used queries
1
Skip to content
DEV Community
Find related posts...
Powered by  Algolia
Log in
Create account

16
Jump to Comments

346
Save

Boost

Cover image for A Guide to Coding Standards to Improve Code Quality
Documatic profile imageSuraj Vishwakarma
Suraj Vishwakarma for Documatic
Posted on Jun 16, 2023


157

9

4

6

12
A Guide to Coding Standards to Improve Code Quality
#
webdev
#
javascript
#
beginners
#
programming
Cover Image by Freepik

Introduction
Writing code is easy but writing readable code is tricky. When working as the sole developer, you might miss a lot of coding standards as you are the only one going to work on them. This is the scenario of every developer when they start writing code. But when you get into an organization where you have to code in the team, you might code like as usually you do. This is not a good practice in both scenarios.

There are coding standards that you can follow to enhance your code quality. Coding standards are a set of guidelines and conventions that developers follow when writing code. These standards ensure that the code is readable, maintainable, and consistent across a project or organization. This will not only elevate the performance of the code but also make it more readable by other developers on the team. This list is from a web developer's perspective. You will find examples that are more suited for a web developer.

So, today we are going to look into some coding standards that you should integrate into your programming. Let’s get started.

Indentation and Formatting
Prettier Demo

Make sure that your code is not only working but also readable. Readable code will let other developers easily work on the project. There are various methods that you can use to make your code readable. We will discuss a few of them in this list. For this part, we need to make the code well-indented and formatted.

Code that is well formatted does not require a lot of attention to go through. As the developers have worked with such indentation. This makes the developers read the code more easily. You can make use of tools such as Prettier to make the code well formatted as per the programming language.

Naming Convention
Naming Convention

One of the challenging tasks is to name variables and functions. There are various naming conventions that you can use. Here are some of them.

Camel Case: In camel case, the first letter of the identifier is lowercase, and the first letter of each subsequent concatenated word is capitalized.
Variables and Function	Class
myVariable	MyClass
Snake Case: Snake case uses underscores (_) to separate words.
Variables and Function	Class
my_variable	my_class
Upper Case: In some cases, identifiers are written entirely in uppercase letters.
Variables and Function	Class
MY_VARIABLE	MY_CLASS
There are other naming conventions too. I don’t go through all of them and also which is better. Just use one naming convention and stick to it.

Comments and Documentation
Better Comments

Commenting on your code is another way of making the code readable. This can be from your perspective or other developers'. You can explain the uses of function, TODO, bug explanation, Algorithm steps, and others.

Here are some of the best practices that you use to write comments:

Write your comments as such others can easily understand. It should be able to explain the purpose, functionality, or intent of the code.
Put comments as such it provides context. You should If you're referring to something specific, provide enough context for others to understand your comment. You should write a comment before the code. In-line comments should be used for small comments.
Follow a consistent commenting style as per the programming language. There are various ways of commenting but choose one and stick with that for readability purposes.
Be concise with your comments. Long and overly explained comments can become difficult to read.
Don’t write comments for each line. As it will overshadow the important comments and also make the code full of comments.
Self-explanatory steps and usually things should be exempt from commenting.
Tools such as Better Comments can help you in writing finer comments. Mintlify can help you in generating comments and documentation for your project.

Error Handling
Error Handling

Errors and exceptions are part of the code. It deals with identifying, capturing, and appropriately responding to any errors. It is a critical aspect of writing reliable code. Guidelines for handling errors and exceptions consistently throughout the codebase, ensuring proper error reporting, and logging.

Make sure that your code is always able to handle errors. For instance, while requesting an API. Your code should cover both scenarios that is success and failure. As per the response, create a log for developers and notify the user about the unsuccessful request. This is one such way of making your code error-proof.

Testing Application
Testing Application

Testing your application is a crucial step before shipping it into production. It simply involves the process of verifying that the application is behaving as it was intended. It also involves using the application to cover all the scenarios in that the user can interact with the application.

You can create a test plan that outlines the objective, test coverage, testing techniques, and timelines. This will help in sorting most of the things even before starting testing.

Some good practices that you can use while testing:

Test Cases: You can write different test cases for specific scenarios to test different aspects of the application.
Bug Tracking: During testing, it's important to track and document any identified issues or bugs.
Cover different tests: You should be able to test the application with various testing techniques to ensure that the application is reliable.
Automate testing: Wherever possible try to automate the testing with tools. It will check for common issues and will also save a lot of time.
You can use the following techniques while testing the application:

Unit Testing: It deals with testing individual units or components of the application in isolation. It involves testing functions, methods, or classes to ensure they work as intended.
Integration Testing: It involves testing the interaction between different components or modules of the application.
Regression Testing: Regression testing is carried out after making changes or enhancements to the software to ensure that existing functionality has not been adversely affected.
Security Testing: As its name suggests, it deals with identifying vulnerabilities and weaknesses in the application.
Security
Security

While writing code, you must follow security and performance-related guideline. You should avoid common vulnerabilities and also try to optimize the code for performance. Some common security vulnerabilities can be:

Input Validation: You should enforce robust input validation. It will prevent vulnerabilities like injection attacks.
Authentication and Authorization: A modern application needs both features today. You implement strong mechanisms such as using strong password hashing, enforcing password complexity, and role-based access.
Data protection: You should not leak any data whether it is a user or sensitive API key. You should emphasize protecting sensitive data through techniques such as encryption, secure key management, and secure storage practices.
Conclusion
Implementing coding standards such as these will help you in achieving code quality. This will also ensure consistency, readability, and maintainability of the codebase, making it easier for developers to collaborate and understand each other's code. This will minimize the occurrence of bugs and errors.

This will make the codebase more maintainable as there will be less work to be done after completing the project. Otherwise, you have to add many things after completing the code. I hope this article has helped you know some coding standards that you can implement in your code. Thanks for reading the article.

profile
Sentry
Promoted

Sentry blog image

How I fixed 20 seconds of lag for every user in just 20 minutes.
Our AI agent was running 10-20 seconds slower than it should, impacting both our own developers and our early adopters. See how I used Sentry Profiling to fix it in record time.

Read more

Top comments (16)
Subscribe
pic
Add to the discussion
 
 
middlekerb profile image
Bonifasius Edwin
•
Jun 18 '23

For naming convention, here is my use case

camelCase -> method, variable name
PascalCase -> class name
snake_case -> database field name
kebab-case -> url, branch, folder name

49
 likes
Like
Reply
 
 
adarshrajpathak profile image
Adarsh Raj Pathak
•
Jun 20 '23 • Edited on Jun 20

Also, The identifiers with corresponding area that they are specifically used in(or found in)
camelCase ->Java(and many other)
PascalCase -> almost every language
snake_case -> database & python(and some other)
kebab-case -> web-development(HTML, CSS, Js and related tech)


4
 likes
Like
Reply
 
 
mrlectus profile image
LectusMan
•
Jun 19 '23

Kebab for goats


5
 likes
Like
Reply
 
 
coderatul profile image
Atul Kushwaha
•
Jun 18 '23

Hey @middlekerb
Welcome to the community of thriving developers, connect with people, gain knowledge by reading blogs and even create blogs to share your knowledge

All the best


5
 likes
Like
Reply
 
 
ekimcem profile image
Ekim Cem Ülger
•
Jun 20 '23

We all follow this in our team ! exactly the same.


3
 likes
Like
Reply
 
 
joebordes profile image
Joe Bordes
•
Jun 18 '23 • Edited on Jun 25

nice article. I agree with almost everything except the comments. IMO comments should be scarse, write code that can be easily read, use comments only when the logic is hard to grasp or you need to convey something to your future self.


11
 likes
Like
Reply
 
 
manchicken profile image
Mike Stemle Subscriber
•
Jun 20 '23

The problem with writing articles like this is that you’ve got a really good set of stuff that does improve quality (testing, security, etc) coupled with subjective standards (formatting, naming, and comments) which do not improve quality.

The former are disciplines which can demonstrably improve code quality, security, and performance. The latter are opinions that many folks have, sometimes rather strongly, which are a matter of preference, and contribute very little of value to the code. The latter, however, does have the potential to improve the developer experience, which is important.

My advice to most folks: focus on what makes your code better, and then for the formatting just use something that does that for you. If you find yourself spending any meaningful amount of time focused on aesthetic qualities of the text files that make up your application, you’re likely wasting valuable time that you could be using to write more tests which will make your code better.


4
 likes
Like
Reply
 
 
panayiotisgeorgiou profile image
Panayiotis Georgiou
•
Jun 21 '23

thanks for sharing


3
 likes
Like
Reply
 
 
jegonag profile image
jegonag
•
Jun 22 '23 • Edited on Jun 22

Follow secure coding practices to protect against common vulnerabilities, such as injection attacks, cross-site scripting (XSS), or insecure authentication. Sanitize user input, use parameterized queries, and validate and escape data to prevent security breaches.
Regards: apk crave


2
 likes
Like
Reply
 
 
akpi816218 profile image
akpi816218
•
Jun 20 '23

I always keep constants and environment variables in UPPER_SNAKE_CASE
class/constructor camel case, capitalized first letter
Everything else camel case, first letter lower case


1
 like
Like
Reply
 
 
adarshrajpathak profile image
Adarsh Raj Pathak
•
Jun 20 '23

The identifiers with corresponding area that they are specifically used in(or found in)
camelCase ->Java(and many other)
PascalCase -> almost every language
snake_case -> database & python(and some other)
kebab-case -> web-development(HTML, CSS, Js and related tech)


3
 likes
Like
Reply
 
 
freddyhm profile image
Freddy Hidalgo-Monchez
•
Jun 21 '23

Very good points! One thing that is also very important to remember is how readable is the code for the stakeholders (team, group, etc.)

I believe adhering to a style and coding convention can only improve the readability if the stakeholders agree that it does 😛

So having the buy-in from everyone involved is super critical.


2
 likes
Like
Reply
 
 
fruntend profile image
fruntend
•
Jun 19 '23

Сongratulations 🥳! Your article hit the top posts for the week - dev.to/fruntend/top-10-posts-for-f...
Keep it up 👍


2
 likes
Like
Reply
 
 
og_dev profile image
OGBONNA SUNDAY
•
Jul 12 '23

Thanks for this awesome article 🍕. Really insightful


2
 likes
Like
Reply
View full discussion (16 comments)
Code of Conduct • Report abuse
profile
Sentry
Promoted

The best way to debug slow web pages cover image

The best way to debug slow web pages
Tools like Page Speed Insights and Google Lighthouse are great for providing advice for front end performance issues. But what these tools can’t do, is evaluate performance across your entire stack of distributed services and applications.

Watch video

Read next
ashinno profile image
What is Shortest ?🔥🔥🔥
Ash Inno - Jan 16

dev-resources profile image
🔥 25+ Top-Read AI Articles for Developers.
Dev Resources - Jan 17

joyobaidu profile image
5 Fun Projects to Master ES6 Javascript Basics in 2025 🚀👨‍💻
TriumphantCode - Jan 15

leandroveiga profile image
Unlocking New Possibilities: Top LINQ Methods Introduced in .NET 9
Leandro Veiga - Jan 18


Documatic
Follow
More from Documatic
Transitioning to a Microservices Architecture: Overcoming Obstacles
#javascript #beginners #programming #webdev
Data Privacy Laws: Navigating Compliance in the Age of Big Data
#beginners #programming #webdev #database
The Future of Cloud Computing: Predictions and Trends
#webdev #javascript #beginners #tutorial
profile
_SurveyJS
Promoted

SurveyJS custom survey software

JavaScript Form Builder UI Component
Generate dynamic JSON-driven forms directly in your JavaScript app (Angular, React, Vue.js, jQuery) with a fully customizable drag-and-drop form builder. Easily integrate with any backend system and retain full ownership over your data, with no user or form submission limits.

Learn more

Thank you to our Diamond Sponsor Neon for supporting our community.

DEV Community — A constructive and inclusive social network for software developers. With you every step of your journey.

Home
DEV++
Podcasts
Videos
Tags
DEV Help
Forem Shop
Advertise on DEV
DEV Challenges
DEV Showcase
About
Contact
Free Postgres Database
Software comparisons
Code of Conduct
Privacy Policy
Terms of use
Built on Forem — the open source software that powers DEV and other inclusive communities.

Made with love and Ruby on Rails. DEV Community © 2016 - 2025.

Beta
0 / 10
used queries
1
BairesDev
Blog
Services





Our Clients
About Us
Blog
Careers
Schedule a Call
Nishant R.
"Of the 15 engineers on my team, a third are from BairesDev"
Nishant R. - Pinterest

500+ companies trust us with
their software development needs.

Blog
Software Development
6 Good Coding Practices
6 Good Coding Practices
Ignoring good coding practices can lead to subpar software that can break at any moment, offer lesser performance, or be hard to update. We certainly don't want anything like that.

10 min read
Damian Scalerandi
By Damian Scalerandi

SVP of Professional Services Damian Scalerandi leads every step of IT project delivery with multi-cutural teams to help accomplish client goals.

Good Coding Practices
Article Contents

Ignoring good coding practices can lead to subpar software that can break at any moment, offer lesser performance, or be hard to update. And we certainly don’t want anything like that to happen.

If you have ever been around developers, you’ve surely heard disaster stories and insider jokes about bad coding practices. This might make you feel that lousy code is imminent and that, if you get into development, you will come across bad practices sooner or later. However, that doesn’t have to be the case.

As those very same developers could tell you, software development has a series of coding standards and practices that most of them are undoubtedly familiar with. They are included in software development courses, shared in development teams, or even learned in the wild. The main problem is that they aren’t standardized or formally formulated – they are tricks of the trade that developers are encouraged to follow in order to write good code.

The other problem is that too many of them don’t always follow these practices. For these developers, the only worry is having the final product working as intended, even if it means leaving out comments or bypassing peer reviews. In other words, the coding process only involves writing code that is passable – not writing good code. However, as we have underscored, ignoring best practices can lead to subpar software that can break at any moment, offer lesser performance, or be hard to update.

That’s why following good practices and coding guidelines is so important. They serve as standards to follow throughout the development to improve the final quality of the code. By adhering to them, software developers and development teams can get products working while also providing those products with better performance and more robust foundations for updating and upgrading them.

That’s also why I thought it would be nice to revisit some key practices that we at BairesDev follow to ensure the quality of our code and products.

Why You Should Use Best Coding Practices
Using good practice feels like an intuitive thing – if it’s something good, then you should definitely use it, right? Unfortunately, my experience has proven to me that that isn’t necessarily the case in the software development world. As I pointed out before, many software developers sacrifice some of these practices in order to meet deadlines or decrease the workload.

However, the short-term gains a software developer can attain from ignoring coding best practices pale before the benefits those developers could be getting if they actually were to adhere to them. Just some of those benefits include:



Let’s take a closer look at the main advantages of writing good code.

Better Workflow
Following good practices streamlines all development processes because the whole team is on the same page about the work they are doing. Teams that follow these established best practices have better communication, understand one other’s roles, and are better equipped to prioritize the work, making the whole life cycle run much more smoothly.

Increased Efficiency and Productivity
When an entire team is following solid coding practices, everyone has a better overall understanding of the project, which leads to fewer instances of a software glitch or error and a reduced need for constant fixes. That maximizes the efficiency of everything developers code, which ultimately translates into a boost in productivity.

Enhanced Product Quality
Peer reviews and code comments allow teams to identify bugs and problems earlier on, which allows them to work on fixes before the product goes to production. That means there will be fewer issues down the line, which will ultimately translate into more efficient code, better performance, and a more stable product (that ultimately also means more robust software).

More Organized Work
Most development teams use management platforms to track their projects’ progress, but they can go beyond that by using tags. Through them, a team can have a more organized file structure, all linked with the tasks at hand. This makes it easier for developers to find what they have to work on at any given time while also helping them better organize their jobs.

Reduced Costs
All of the above (increased efficiency and productivity, better workflow, and higher product quality) converge into this benefit. That’s because a team that is governed by good practices and coding conventions spends less time fixing things and gets the most out of the time they work on a specific task.

Getting those five benefits should be enough reason to convince any developer or development team to adopt good or best coding practices. Even if developers don’t care about organization or productivity, avoiding the frustration that comes with having to deal with bugs and errors should be enough motivation to follow good practices.

Now that you understand the importance of good coding practices, let’s review a handful of the essential ones.

6 Essential Coding Practices for Any Programming Language
Any seasoned developer might point out that only six practices don’t even begin to cover the spectrum of good practices you should be following. That might be true, but for this article’s purposes, those six practices are enough to lay down a solid foundation through which you can achieve higher code quality. Also, they are great for illustrating how important it is to write code the correct way.

Without further ado, the six essential top coding practices include the following:

6 Essential Coding Practices

#1 Comments
When a developer works on their code, they follow a logic that isn’t always easy to follow by others (or, after some time, even themselves!). This is why commenting code is such a good thing: it provides explanations of code snippets that can come in handy for other developers that need to rework someone else’s code later on.

Comments are simple annotations whose only goal is to make it easier for anyone checking the code to understand exactly what the developer was trying to do. Many developers feel like it is a waste of time to write comments, but that is never, ever the case. Even when comments feel redundant, they can serve a purpose, from reminding the developer of the logic behind a line of code to teaching beginner programmers how to write good code to illuminate the objective behind it.

well-commented-code-block-javascript

#2 Peer Review
Another staple of good coding standards, peer review, implies that all the code written by a developer is always reviewed by someone else. This simple step allows developers to pass their work onto a fresh set of eyes that can detect issues with the code more easily and point them out before they become bigger problems.

Peer review should be a standard process in all kinds of projects, but its importance in bigger and more complex projects cannot be understated. If a developer ends up merging a code that wasn’t reviewed, they expose the whole entire project to potentially more significant problems that can ramp up the costs and efforts to fix. That’s why it’s always best to foster collaboration between developers to review each other’s code in the early stages of a project.

#3 Pull Requests
A pull request happens whenever a developer tells the rest of the team about changes they have worked on and are to be pushed to the main repository. You can think of a pull-request system as a warning system in which developers tell one another that there is modified code that needs to be reviewed and discussed before being merged. In a certain sense, pull requests combine comments and peer reviews into one practice, even when they aren’t necessarily the same.

good-coding-practice-git-pull-request-example

#4 Tags
One of the most neglected practices in all software development, the inclusion of tags is (believe it or not) highly beneficial for the process. That’s because using tags allows developers to quickly identify the different files they work with on a particular project. Thus, they can access them more efficiently while improving their overall organization. Tags can also help identify features, bug fixes, and improvements, which ultimately leads to an index of sorts of all the things covered in a particular project.

 #5 Meaningful Naming Conventions
Naming conventions are useful for identifying and distinguishing classes, variables, types, and functions in source code. In order to write strong code for software projects, it’s always a good idea to use descriptive language that defines what the code includes. Any developer should be able to read the names involved in someone else’s code and understand what is contained within it.

This also contributes to better code readability. Additionally, it provides more information to the reader, promotes clarity, and reduces ambiguity.

#6 Don’t Repeat
Repetitive code, also called duplicate code or copy and paste code, is a block of code that occurs multiple times in your codebase. It’s typically a problem that occurs when programmers are working quickly, but it’s also a case of sacrificing quality in order to achieve speed. While it can be useful in some cases, you should aim to keep it to a minimum.

One of the biggest problems with repetitive code is that it can lead to increased technical debt. Additionally, it can make your code more vulnerable to security threats and risks.

Meanwhile, focusing on unique code with minimal duplication leads to better readability, improved testing capacities, and stronger code overall.

Writing Code, The Right Way
At BairesDev, we follow a strict policy of adhering to these and other best coding practices to ensure positive results for all of our projects. The way we see it, these practices are the core of good software development, as they provide higher-quality products that are easier to maintain, update, and upgrade.

Our own experience drives us to be ardent defenders of best coding practices: we have seen their transformative power for software development. And that’s why, though we appreciate a good bad coding joke or story, we always treat good coding practices seriously – and why you should, too.

Best Coding Practices FAQ
What are the benefits of good programming practice?
There are many benefits to good programming practices, including better workflows, increased efficiency and productivity, enhanced product quality, more organized work, reduced costs, and less technical debt.

Why are coding standards are important?
Coding standards are important because they lead to stronger, more stable projects and products that have fewer vulnerabilities and require less maintenance in the long term. One of the biggest risks of ignoring coding practices, in contrast, is that while it can mean quicker project turnaround, it will lead to longer-term problems like excessive technical debt and vulnerable projects.

How can I learn good coding practices?
Beginner programmers and seasoned programmers alike should take the time to learn coding conventions. In order to learn good coding practices, you can discuss code with other programmers, such as ones on your team or in large online communities, study other developers’ projects, and read up on coding best practices.

Article tags:
custom software development
Damian Scalerandi
By Damian Scalerandi

Damian Scalerandi is SVP of Professional Services at BairesDev. Damian leads every step of IT projects from design through project delivery. His 10+ years of experience in the tech field helps him lead globally diverse teams on large-scale tech projects.

Blockchain Can Disrupt Data Science5 Ways In Which Blockchain Can Disrupt Data Science
Previous article
 - Is It Really Is It Really Easier To Implement AI Today?
Next article
Hiring engineers?
We provide nearshore tech talent to companies from startups to enterprises like Google and Rolls-Royce.

Alejandro D.
Alejandro D.
Sr. Full-stack Dev.
Gustavo A.
Gustavo A.
Sr. QA Engineer
Fiorella G.
Fiorella G.
Sr. Data Scientist
About Us
Our Services
Our Clients
“
BairesDev assembled a dream team for us and in just a few months our digital offering was completely transformed.

VP Product Manager
VP Product Manager
Rolls-Royce
Read Case Study
Related articles
The AI Ecosystem: Picking the Right Model for Your Goals
ATDD vs. TDD vs. BDD: Testing Approaches Compared
5 Essential Tech Skills to Safeguard Your Data with Cloud Native Security
AI in DevOps: Testing Remains an All-Time Critical Area
Manual QA Is Not Dying, Not Even in the Era of AI. Here’s Why
The WebGPU Advantage: Faster, Smoother Graphics for Cross-Platform Game Development
BairesDev Logo
Discover BairesDev.
About Us
Methodologies
Technologies
Certifications
Our Services
Dedicated Teams
Staff Augmentation
Software Outsourcing
Expertise
Diversity
Social Responsibility
Senior Advisor Program
Resources.
Case Studies
Blog
Press
Software Development Insights
Technologies Insights
Industries Insights
Technology Resource Center
Client Referral Program
Careers.
Job Opportunities
Talent Referrals
Get in touch.

Schedule a Call
Contact Us
+1 (408) 478-2739
Get insights from the experts on building and scaling technology teams.

Your e-mail address
name@email.com

By subscribing I accept the Privacy Policy.

Subscribe
Follow us.

Privacy Policy|Terms of Service|Do Not Sell My Personal Information
BairesDev 2009 - 2025. All rights reserved.


By continuing to use this site, you agree to our cookie policy and privacy policy.

GOT IT
Beta
0 / 10
used queries
1
Qulix
AboutServicesIndustriesTechnologiesSolutionsInsightsCareerContact Us








Jan 2, 2023 9 min
13 Good Coding Practices: What to Know in 2024









Good coding practices are a set of rules that helps developers write clean code. High-quality code, in turn, ensures that applications will run smoothly and software projects will be successful. Stripe and Harris Poll did their research and found that programmers spend 13.5 hours solving technical problems and 3.8 hours fixing bad code.

The researchers also revealed that companies have to spend $85 billion annually on solving issues caused by low-quality code. If you want to avoid these problems, your development team should provide consistent and beautiful lines of code. Following coding best practices will help your specialists working with any programming language write code accurately from the very beginning.



written by:
Pavel Dichkovsky
Senior Software Developer


Contents


How Does Bad Code Adversely Affect Your Project?
What is Good Code?
13 Good Coding Practices: A Way to a Successful Project
Last Word
How Does Bad Code Adversely Affect Your Project?
bad code

Let's talk about messy code for a moment. Sure, it might get the job done initially, but in the long run, it's a recipe for disaster. Subpar code quality doesn't just impact the current project; it casts a shadow over your entire business.

Picture this: your application gains traction and you're ready to expand, add new features, or just make some upgrades. So, you bring in another developer. Now, if your code is a mess, they're in for a rough ride. They'll have to wade through the chaos of your existing architecture, untangle convoluted data structures, and decipher the relationships between them. High-quality code, on the other hand, streamlines this process, enabling developers to navigate swiftly and implement changes seamlessly.

But here's the kicker: bad code breeds bugs. And when those bugs rear their ugly heads, your developers are in for a round of bug-hunting that eats away at precious time. If one slips through the cracks and makes it to production, brace yourself for a slew of issues down the line.

Now, let's talk about speed. Users want new features pronto. Quality code empowers development teams to deliver updates swiftly, keeping pace with user demands and staying ahead of the competition. With a smooth development process, your app remains competitive, users stay engaged, and your profits keep rolling in. It's a win-win.

What is Good Code?
code line length

Ideal code has the following features:

It's Easily Modifiable
If the architecture is well-structured, you can extend your code without much time or technical effort. The code should be expressed briefly and clearly. Code entities should not be closely related; each entity should be responsible only for its own part of the functionality.

It's Simple and Easy to Read
The majority of software requires regular enhancement. Thus, different developers contribute to a single project. And although code is, well, code, you shouldn’t have to decipher it: regardless of who opens it, they should be able to quickly read it. This means that the code has to be simple, convenient, and easily comprehensible. If these factors were taken into account, then it is possible for developers to trace the author’s train of thought and understand how the processes of software should function.

It's Safe
When coding, you must always remember the overall security of your product. Veracode revealed that 75.8% of apps have at least one security flaw, and 23.7% have numerous security issues that are usually solved for a very long time.

So, clean and elegant code reduces the cost of future changes and the development time of the application. You will gain a serious competitive advantage if you care about the quality of your code and use modern and effective development practices in your work.

13 Good Coding Practices: A Way to a Successful Project
coding practices

#1 Compliance with Coding Standards and Guidelines
There are generally accepted coding standards and even programming platforms that will tell you how to follow those standards. The team members can agree in advance on how to write the blocks of code and how to act in some situations. Then the code written by different programmers will be visually similar, which will help other developers work with it.

#2 Refactoring
Refactoring is the process of improving a piece of code without writing new functionality. As a result, you get better code and the ability to efficiently maintain it. There are two refactoring approaches:

Planned refactoring when developers initially put refactoring time into the development cycle (e.g., every six months); and
On-demand refactoring that is done when adding new features is slowed down because they are difficult to integrate into legacy code.
Refactoring should be accompanied by tests because even minor changes can break the application. Experienced developers recommend using version control systems in order to roll back inaccurate refactoring in case of errors and try again. Yes, the code should be clear and readable. But it should primarily work.

#3 Code Review
Experienced specialists check the code of junior developers and leave their feedback. Juniors, in turn, get a chance to avoid silly mistakes, take a fresh look at their work, make improvements, and keep the code consistent. Senior developers often review their colleagues' code to share their experiences. This collaboration can improve the quality and readability of their code.

#4 Automated Testing
Automated tests allow you to find critical bugs and ensure that your code operates as intended. As a rule, developers create test cases by themselves. They run the code with different parameters and check against the already known results. They usually carry out:

unit tests that check particular parts of software;
complex tests that check the whole system;
load tests that check how the product operates under load;
regression tests that check how a modified app operates, and so on.
Tests can save you tons of time as they can find a bunch of mistakes during the refactoring process.

#5 Correct Naming
Give variables, functions, classes, methods, and constants clear and concise names. Make them understandable for the person who will read your code after a while. You will be grateful to yourself when you have to return to this code and you don't have to puzzle over what you meant when you wrote the code.

#6 Instruments
programming tools

There are various tools that make the coding process faster and easier. Of course, developers can write nice code without programming instruments, but it will take longer and adversely affect their efficiency. Moreover, they can develop new tools for themselves. A convenient and flexible instrument that meets all your requirements will help you create clean code and develop your project further.

#7 Statistical Analysis
The above-mentioned code review method does not always allow you to find all the defects, so it's good practice to use statistical analysis. This is an automatic code check that does not require a programmer to run an app. It will analyze the entire code and find bugs that were missed during the code review.

#8 Test-driven Development (TDD)
According to this approach, the programmer initially thinks over the classes and their public interfaces, the interaction between them, and immediately prepares tests for them. When the public interface and interaction are declared, the developer gradually implements the program, checking how it passes the tests and meets the requirements.

#9 Documentation
In fact, programmers don't like to write design and technical documentation as this is a time-consuming process. However, this is very important. If there is no technical code documentation, then other developers will find it difficult to read and maintain the code. Don't be careless about writing documentation as you won't be able to understand your own code after a while. If the code is documented, its structure and logic are improved. Simple and clear code is readable and even self-documenting.

#10 Continuous Integration (CI)
Continuous Integration is a software development practice that requires developers to release code to a central repository on a regular basis (e.g., several times a day). Each code update is validated using automated tests, allowing the development team to spot problems at an early stage. This allows specialists to spend less time looking for problems in the code and more time creating new features.

#11 Coding Conventions
Make a list of coding conventions in which you define how variables should be declared, naming conventions, and so on. You can add, change, and delete any rules you want. It's essential to follow this list because it helps your team produce good code that can speed up the long-term software development process. The list is reusable, and developers don't have to waste time fixing old bugs. Also, you can show the set of rules to new team members, which allows them to follow the code style.

#12 Error Analysis
automate repetitive tasks

No matter how cool the development team is, the code will inevitably have bugs. Therefore, it's important to analyze and handle all the errors. Always fix critical bugs immediately. If the bug is minor and allows the product to complete the task without major problems, the bug may be fixed later. Don't forget about tools that can help you track errors.

#13 Commenting
Comments are explanatory lines in the computer code that allow you to understand the meaning of these lines. They will help the programmer to quickly understand someone else's code if it is necessary to change something in the program. When creating new libraries, functions, and system variables, comments will help you see the logic of the application. They will help the tester check the product better as well.

When preparing comments, you should follow some rules in order not to spoil your code with too long and messy lines. Write comments right above the code they refer to. They should be short and meaningful. Comment out all the main elements of the code like modules, functions, constants, global variables, interfaces, classes, and their constituent elements (methods, properties, constants, and others).

Last Word
coding style guide

We've told you about the coding best practices that help developers write clean code and effectively maintain the project. In addition, we'd like to discuss the quality and speed issue. There is an opinion that it is more important to launch a project earlier, despite the presence of any bugs, and then finalize it, than initially wasting time writing perfect code. Slower temps and rigorous testing are believed to lead to higher stability in production systems. The DORA report upends this assumption.

The researchers found out which approach makes the team most effective. More frequent code releases reduce the number of serious bugs. Teams that prefer to launch a fully ready product or release updates less frequently face a lot of problems and spend too much time solving them. The research also demonstrates that these development teams are more organized and build processes better.

Nevertheless, we don't recommend you to be fully focused on the speed. Everything depends on your project. If you are building a banking application, spend more time on testing since there is a risk of losing a significant amount of money due to a minor bug. If your product does not require support and improvements (for example, you are working upon a landing page), just make sure that it works and launch it in order to achieve the desired result on time.

If you want to learn more about the coding best practices or discuss them with our specialists, please visit our website or get in touch with our support team.


    
Average rating 4.2 / 5. Vote count: 6

subscribe_blue
Subscribe to our updatesWe’ll send you a selection of our articles and updates to your inbox once a month
Email

I consent that Qulix collects and processes my personal details according to the Privacy Policy.*
Related Articles
Great Methodologies: 7 Lean Software Development Principles
Software Development Life Cycle Template 2024
Programming Languages: When Functional Programming Is the Best Choice
Contacts

Name*
Company name

Email*
Phone

Details*


I consent that Qulix collects and processes my personal details according to Privacy Policy.*

I’d like to get useful information from Qulix
Feel free to get in touch with us! Use this contact form for an ASAP response.

Call us at +44 151 528 8015
E-mail us at request@qulix.com

  

Contact Us
Field View House,
Pavement Lane,
Mobberley, Cheshire,
WA16 7EJ,
United Kingdom

request@qulix.com
+44 781 135 1374
About Blog Services Process Industries News White papers Career
  

Subscribe to our newsletter
Email

I consent that Qulix collects and processes my personal details according to Privacy Policy.*


© 2025 Qulix. All rights reserved
Privacy Policy

The website uses cookies for analytics, advertising and to make user experience more personal and convenient. By continuing using the website you agree to our Privacy Policy.Accept

Beta
0 / 10
used queries
1

Downloads
Integrations
Blog
Company
Contact
Home
Products
Solutions
Customers
Resources
Support
Services
Image Blog QAC Using Coding Standards
HomeResourcesBlog Coding Standards Best Practices
February 8, 2018
Coding Standards Best Practices
Static AnalysisSecurity & Compliance
By Richard Bellairs

Coding best practices when paired with a coding standard help you to ensure that your code is safe, secure, and reliable. This is especially important if you're developing a safety-critical product, such as an automobile.

However, writing good code can be difficult. For that reason, we explain how following best practices for using coding standards help you to write high-quality code, share nine coding best practices, and explain how to choose the best coding standards for your specific project.

Read along or jump ahead to the section that interests you the most:

Table of Contents
Coding Best Practices
9 Coding Standards Best Practices
Coding Standards Best Practices: A Closer Look
Choosing the Best Coding Standards for Coding Best Practices
➡️ start Your Free Static Code Analysis

Back to top
Coding Best Practices
The best way to write good, high-quality code is to use a coding standard.

Coding standards are guidelines and they’re often required to comply with a safety or security standard.

📕 Related Resource: Learn how to improve your code quality.
Back to top
9 Coding Standards Best Practices
Here are the top 9 coding standards best practices:

1. Know Why You're Using It

2. Choose the Best Coding Standard for Your Industry

3. Use Coding Rules and Follow Recommendations

4. Describe the Intent Behind the Rule

5. Update Coding Standards With Care

6. Consider Open vs. Closed Standards

7. Prioritize Coding Rules

8. Plan for Rule Deviations

9. Educate Programmers

Back to top
Coding Standards Best Practices: A Closer Look
1. Know Why You're Using It

A coding standard’s purpose is to restrict use of problematic areas of the programming language.

So, using coding standards prevents undefined or unspecified behavior. And it limits the use of error-prone constructs, such as "goto".

And using coding standards also improves the code’s readability, maintainability, and portability. One example is the use of “typedef” to simplify the syntax of complex structures. This reduces overall cyclomatic complexity. 

2. Choose the Best Coding Standard for Your Industry for Coding Standards Best Practices

The coding standard must be recognized and accepted by the industry for which it is being used. Choosing one recognized by your industry is extremely important. It reduces the amount of qualification work to satisfy your end users.

A good example is MISRA C and C++. These were written for the automotive industry and have since become the de facto standards for safety-critical applications. They're recognized as one of the best coding standards for embedded industries.

📕 Related Resource: Learn more about how you can benefit from using MISRA.
3. Use Coding Rules and Follow Recommendations

Coding standards usually include two elements — rules and recommendations (or directives).

Rules are the backbone of a coding standard.

Code compliance is normally defined in term of rules. Modern rules are often stated in such a way that makes it easy to verify them with a static analyzer. For example, the rules are “statically enforceable”.

Recommendations (or directives) are usually advisory.

It’s up the engineer whether to follow them or not. Normally they do not impact compliance. They usually aren’t statically enforceable.

Most coding standards have both rules and recommendations. However, some coding standards only have rules — such as ISO/IEC TS 17961: 2013 C secure coding rules and MISRA C:2004.

4. Describe the Intent Behind the Rule

Each rule should have an identification string, a headline, and a description.

The identification string identifies the rule. For example, “Rule 10.3” or “EXP30-C”.

The headlines summarize the intent of the rules. For example, “There shall be no dead code” or “Freeing memory multiple times”.

The description elaborates on the headline and provides suitable context.

The description can also discuss how it is applied. For example, whether it can be assessed by analyzing a single transaction unit or the entire project.

And it could include code examples of compliant and noncompliant behavior — and exceptions to the rule.

5. Update Coding Standards With Care

Frequent updates to a coding standard may not be a good thing. This is especially true in safety-critical applications where long lifecycles are the norm. And these industries tend to be suspicious of using new language constructs that have not yet been proven reliable.

The sequence of updates to the MISRA standard is a good example of having significant delays between each version. C99 was finalized in 2011. But it wasn’t until 2013 that MISRA C: 2012 updated the standard to C99. And MISRA C++ — published in 2008 — marked the update to the 2003 version of C++.

6. Consider Open vs. Closed Standards

Some coding standards are open to community participation — such as CERT. Others are closed and deciding by working groups — such as MISRA.

So, CERT puts the emphasis on community cooperation. The result is a coding standard in the form of an open, freely available web-based wiki. Users can comment on single guidelines. These comments are considered when the guidelines are reviewed.

MISRA is developed through working groups that create and update standards according to a pre-decided roadmap. This top-down model leads to the work not usually being publicly available. There is normally a price to pay, which helps cover the expenses of the working group. However, MISRA is influenced by community feedback, too.

The main difference between open versus closed standards is how quickly they change.

Open standards tend to be extremely dynamic. Guidelines change quickly. Closed standards, however, are better for safety-critical industries. They provide a stable reference to meet mandatory requirements.

7. Prioritize Coding Rules

When you check your code against a coding standard, you might get a wall of bugs. Categorizing the rules with a severity matrix helps you assess code quality and prioritize bug fixes.

Assessing the code quality helps you decide whether to move into production. If there are major problems, it’s not ready. If the problems are minor, then maybe it can go into production and be fixed later.

Defects need to be prioritized so the high severity ones are fixed first. This is particularly useful for coding standards with many rules.

8. Plan for Rule Deviations

Coding rules don’t fit all situations. There will always be deviations.

The three key factors for planning for rule deviations:

Decide which guidelines can be deviated from and which cannot
Specify how a deviation can be done properly
List what needs to be documented or recorded when a deviation takes place.
Having a plan for rule deviations will help you if you need to provide evidence to an auditor.

9. Educate Programmers on Coding Standards Best Practices

One of the goals of coding standards is to educate programmers. And supporting material to a coding standard can provide that education.

Supporting material helps the programmer understand the background or give extra information for those who want a more detailed knowledge.

For example, this might include links to documentation such as ISO standards and books. Or there might be references to other coding standards or reports of real-world problems caused by violations of the guidelines. There might also be information on risk mitigation actions or solutions to specific problems.

Back to top
Choosing the Best Coding Standards for Coding Best Practices
So, how do you choose a coding standard?

You can use these coding standards best practices as a starting point. The next step is to evaluate coding standards based on your needs.

For instance, the embedded systems industry primarily uses C and C++ programming languages. There are several coding standards that support these languages — and each one is different.

📕 Related Resource:Learn how to choose the right coding standard.
Make Sure Coding Standards Best Practices Are Followed
A coding standard only works if it's followed. You can make sure coding standards best practices happen by using a static analyzer, such as Helix QAC or Klocwork. Register for a free trial.

➡️ static analysis free trial

 

Back to top
Twitter/X
tweet
share
share
mail
RSS
Richard Bellairs
Product Marketing Manager, Perforce

Richard Bellairs has 20+ years of experience across a wide range of industries. He held electronics and software engineering positions in the manufacturing, defense, and test and measurement industries in the nineties and early noughties before moving to product management and product marketing. He now champions Perforce’s market-leading code quality management solution. Richard holds a bachelor’s degree in electronic engineering from the University of Sheffield and a professional diploma in marketing from the Chartered Institute of Marketing (CIM).

Products
Plan
Helix ALM
Helix Plan
Create & Develop
Helix Core
Helix Core Git Connector
Helix DAM
Helix TeamHub
Helix Swarm
Helix IPLM
VersIC
Test & Validate
Helix QAC
Klocwork
Operate, Manage, & Scale
SourcePro
HostAccess
HydraExpress
PV-WAVE
Stingray
Visualization
Solutions
By need
Application Lifecycle Management
Agile Project Management
DevOps
Version Control
IP Lifecycle Management
Static Analysis
Audit & Compliance
Configuration Management
IT Infrastructure & Automation
Backlog Management
Project Portfolio Management
By industry
Aerospace & Defense
Automotive
Embedded Systems
Semiconductor
Energy & Utilities
Finance
Game Development
Virtual Production
Government
Life Sciences
Software
Services
Consulting/Professional Services
Consulting Services Overview
Akana
BlazeMeter
Helix ALM
Helix Core
Helix QAC
Klocwork
Helix IPLM
OpenLogic
Perfecto
Zend
Training
Training Overview
Helix Plan
Helix ALM
Helix Core
Helix QAC
Klocwork
OpenLogic
Perfecto
Zend
Resources
Papers & Videos
Events & Webinars
Recorded Webinars
Blog
Perforce U
Support
Software End of Life Policy
Customers
Case Studies
About
Our Team
Our Culture
Careers
Press
Contact Us
Office Locations
Partners
Integrations
Resellers
Quick links
Free Trials
Subscription Center
Customer Support Login
Educational Licenses
How to Buy
Related Links
3 Coding Best Practices for C++
Coding Standards For Quality and Compliance
Security Standards: What Are Secure Coding Standards?
NASA's 10 Rules for Developing Safety-Critical Code
Software Security: Secure Coding Practices Guide
Best Practices For Secure Software Development
Home
Copyright © 2025 Perforce Software, Inc. All rights reserved.  |  Sitemap  |  Terms of Use  |  Privacy Policy

Facebook
TwitterTwitter/X
LinkedIn
YouTube
RSS
Send Feedback
This website uses cookies to enhance user experience and analyze performance. By clicking "Accept All Cookies" or by closing this window without setting preferences, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device.Read our cookie policy.
Cookies Settings Accept All Cookies

close promotion
go to promotion
See What’s New in Helix QAC
Helix QAC 2024.3 features new Qt-based installers and secure authentication enhancements.
Visit What’s New in Helix QAC

Accelerate Compliance for Your 2025 Planning: Webinar Series
Choose from 3 webinars to help you be compliant-ready in the new year!
Beta
0 / 10
used queries
1
Skip to content
geeksforgeeks
Courses
Tutorials
DSA
Data Science
Web Tech


Sign In

Software Engineering Tutorial
Software Development Life Cycle
Waterfall Model
Software Requirements
Software Measurement and Metrics
Software Design Process
System configuration management
Software Maintenance
Software Development Tutorial
Software Testing Tutorial
Product Management Tutorial
Project Management Tutorial
Agile Methodology
Selenium Basics

Coding Standards and Guidelines
Last Updated : 23 May, 2024
Different modules specified in the design document are coded in the Coding phase according to the module specification. The main goal of the coding phase is to code from the design document prepared after the design phase through a high-level language and then to unit test this code.

Table of Content

What is Coding Standards and Guidelines?
Purpose of Having Coding Standards
Coding Standards in Software Engineering
Coding Guidelines in Software Engineering
Conclusion
Frequently Asked Questions related to Coding Standards and Guidelines
What is Coding Standards and Guidelines?
Good software development organizations want their programmers to maintain to some well-defined and standard style of coding called coding standards. They usually make their own coding standards and guidelines depending on what suits their organization best and based on the types of software they develop. It is very important for the programmers to maintain the coding standards otherwise the code will be rejected during code review.

Purpose of Having Coding Standards
The following are the purpose of having Coding Standards:

A coding standard gives a uniform appearance to the codes written by different engineers.
It improves readability, and maintainability of the code and it reduces complexity also.
It helps in code reuse and helps to detect errors easily.
It promotes sound programming practices and increases the efficiency of the programmers.
Coding Standards in Software Engineering
Some of the coding standards are given below:

Limited use of globals: These rules tell about which types of data that can be declared global and the data that can’t be.
Standard headers for different modules: For better understanding and maintenance of the code, the header of different modules should follow some standard format and information. The header format must contain below things that is being used in various companies:
Name of the module
Date of module creation
Author of the module
Modification history
Synopsis of the module about what the module does
Different functions supported in the module along with their input output parameters
Global variables accessed or modified by the module
Naming conventions for local variables, global variables, constants and functions: Some of the naming conventions are given below:
Meaningful and understandable variables name helps anyone to understand the reason of using it.
Local variables should be named using camel case lettering starting with small letter (e.g. localData) whereas Global variables names should start with a capital letter (e.g. GlobalData). Constant names should be formed using capital letters only (e.g. CONSDATA).
It is better to avoid the use of digits in variable names.
The names of the function should be written in camel case starting with small letters.
The name of the function must describe the reason of using the function clearly and briefly.
Indentation: Proper indentation is very important to increase the readability of the code. For making the code readable, programmers should use White spaces properly. Some of the spacing conventions are given below:
There must be a space after giving a comma between two function arguments.
Each nested block should be properly indented and spaced.
Proper Indentation should be there at the beginning and at the end of each block in the program.
All braces should start from a new line and the code following the end of braces also start from a new line.
Error return values and exception handling conventions: All functions that encountering an error condition should either return a 0 or 1 for simplifying the debugging.
Coding Guidelines in Software Engineering
Coding guidelines give some general suggestions regarding the coding style that to be followed for the betterment of understandability and readability of the code.

Some of the coding guidelines are given below :

Avoid using a coding style that is too difficult to understand: Code should be easily understandable. The complex code makes maintenance and debugging difficult and expensive.
Avoid using an identifier for multiple purposes: Each variable should be given a descriptive and meaningful name indicating the reason behind using it. This is not possible if an identifier is used for multiple purposes and thus it can lead to confusion to the reader. Moreover, it leads to more difficulty during future enhancements.
Code should be well documented: The code should be properly commented for understanding easily. Comments regarding the statements increase the understandability of the code.
Length of functions should not be very large: Lengthy functions are very difficult to understand. That’s why functions should be small enough to carry out small work and lengthy functions should be broken into small ones for completing small tasks.
Try not to use GOTO statement: GOTO statement makes the program unstructured, thus it reduces the understandability of the program and also debugging becomes difficult.
Advantages of Coding Guidelines
Coding guidelines increase the efficiency of the software and reduces the development time.
Coding guidelines help in detecting errors in the early phases, so it helps to reduce the extra cost incurred by the software project.
If coding guidelines are maintained properly, then the software code increases readability and understandability thus it reduces the complexity of the code.
It reduces the hidden cost for developing the software.
Conclusion
Coding standards and guidelines ensure consistent, readable, and maintainable code, promoting efficient development and error detection. They standardize naming, indentation, and documentation practices, reducing complexity and facilitating code reuse. Adhering to these practices enhances overall software quality and development efficiency.

Frequently Asked Questions related to Coding Standards and Guidelines
What is the purpose of coding guideline?

Coding guidelines help in detecting errors in the early phases, so it helps to reduce the extra cost incurred by the software project. 


Why are coding standards and guidelines important in software development?

Coding Standards Boost Security and Safety. Software coding standards aim to implant tried-and-true programming techniques that produce code that is secure, dependable, safe, testable, and maintainable.  


What are the 5 pillars of code quality?

Five pillars of code quality are:



Readability

Maintainability

Efficiency

Reliability

Reusability





Comment

More info

Advertise with us
Next Article 
Lines of Code (LOC) in Software Engineering
Similar Reads
Coding Standards and Guidelines
Different modules specified in the design document are coded in the Coding phase according to the module specification. The main goal of the coding phase is to code from the design document prepared after the design phase through a high-level language and then to unit test this code. Table of Conten
5 min read
Lines of Code (LOC) in Software Engineering
A line of code (LOC) is any line of text in a code that is not a comment or blank line, and also header lines, in any case of the number of statements or fragments of statements on the line. LOC consists of all lines containing the declaration of any variable, and executable and non-executable state
4 min read
Microsoft Interview experience | Set 178 (On-Campus Internship for IDC)
There were a total of 3 rounds. 1st was online coding, 2nd was written coding and last round was divided in three parts, basically 3 Technical Interviews. Round 1: Online test on CoCubes contains 3 Coding Questions (Only Function to complete). Total time given was 75 minutes. Find the average of sum
5 min read
Arithmetic Encoding and Decoding Using MATLAB
Arithmetic coding is a type of entropy encoding utilized in lossless data compression. Ordinarily, a string of characters, for example, the words "hey" is represented for utilizing a fixed number of bits per character. In the most straightforward case, the probability of every symbol occurring is eq
6 min read
Difference Between Source Code and Object Code
Anyone needs to have the background knowledge that is required when studying computer programming, especially that of the difference between source code and object code. Such terms are used when describing the process of developing software, compiling it, and its execution. In this article, you will
6 min read
Simple Code Generator
Compiler Design is an important component of compiler construction. It involves many different tasks, such as analyzing the source code and producing an intermediate representation (IR) from it, performing optimizations on the IR to produce a target machine code, and generating external representati
7 min read
Grouping of Phases in Compiler Design
A compiler is software that translates a high-level language into machine-understandable form. Typically, a compiler is made up of six states and the input code in high-level language also known as Source code passes through each state one by one, each state processes the code, resulting in machine-
5 min read
Difference Between Linear Block Codes and Convolutional Codes
In digital communication, making sure messages are sent without errors is important. Two key methods for achieving this are Linear Block Codes and Convolutional Codes. This article will explain what these codes are, how they work, and their differences in a simple way. What is Linear Block Codes? It
4 min read
How to write a Pseudo Code?
Pseudo code is a term which is often used in programming and algorithm based fields. It is a methodology that allows the programmer to represent the implementation of an algorithm. Simply, we can say that it's the cooked up representation of an algorithm. Often at times, algorithms are represented w
5 min read
Representing Instructions in Computer
An instruction is an order given to a computer processor by a computer program. Each instruction is a sequence of 0s and 1s. They help in describing the physical operation that the computer should perform. Registers are used for storing the data temporarily and performing the operations that the ins
4 min read
Flow Graph in Code Generation
A basic block is a simple combination of statements. Except for entry and exit, the basic blocks do not have any branches like in and out. It means that the flow of control enters at the beginning and it always leaves at the end without any halt. The execution of a set of instructions of a basic blo
4 min read
What is One Hot Design?
In the field of computer science and electronics, there are some methods, which are used to represent data in such a way, so that it can be used in machines and computers. These methods are called encoding schemes. One- hot encoding is one of those methods. In this article, we will be discussing one
6 min read
Difference between 2-address instruction and 1-address instructions
When we convert a High-level language into a low-level language so that a computer can understand the program we require a compiler. The compiler converts programming statements into binary instructions. Instructions are nothing but a group of bits that instruct the computer to perform some operatio
5 min read
How to Break a for loop When Response Code is 200?
In the world of API testing, one frequent challenge is dealing with various response codes, such as the all-important HTTP status code 200 (OK). These codes provide critical information about the success or failure of an API request. In this guide, we will explore how to efficiently handle response
6 min read
Basics of Computer Programming For Beginners
Be it any programming language in which you want to grow your career, it's very important to learn the fundamentals first. Before having a good command over the basic concepts of programming, you cannot imagine the growth in that particular career. Hence, this article will talk about all the basic c
8 min read
Optimization of Basic Blocks
Optimization is applied to the basic blocks after the intermediate code generation phase of the compiler. Optimization is the process of transforming a program that improves the code by consuming fewer resources and delivering high speed. In optimization, high-level codes are replaced by their equiv
5 min read
Computer Science 101
It's very common to hear in your CS 101 class, 'Everything is 1's and 0's in the computer world'. Let explore this idea which is the foundation upon which the most complicated technology you can imagine is built. There is something called ASCII - you can google it. It's just a number assigned to mos
4 min read
What is Imperative Programming?
The computer programming paradigm defines the style of programming, approach to solve problem and method of computer systems towards providing solutions use programming. There is a classification of programming paradigms into two broad paradigms i.e., imperative and declarative. This article is base
6 min read
How to Start Coding
In this ever-evolving digital landscape, the ability to code is not just a valuable asset but a gateway to creative expression and innovation. This brief guide will outline practical steps and essential principles to guide aspiring learners on their path to mastering the art of coding. Table of Cont
15+ min read
Coding Decoding Question and Answers
Coding decoding is an important part of the Quantitative Aptitude section in most of the competitive examinations in India.  Coding and decoding questions are a common feature in the reasoning ability section of major Government exams such as those conducted by banks, insurance companies, SSC, and R
3 min read
three90RightbarBannerImg
geeksforgeeks-footer-logo
Corporate & Communications Address:
A-143, 7th Floor, Sovereign Corporate Tower, Sector- 136, Noida, Uttar Pradesh (201305)
Registered Address:
K 061, Tower K, Gulshan Vivante Apartment, Sector 137, Noida, Gautam Buddh Nagar, Uttar Pradesh, 201305
GFG App on Play Store
GFG App on App Store
Advertise with us
Company
About Us
Legal
Privacy Policy
In Media
Contact Us
Advertise with us
GFG Corporate Solution
Placement Training Program
GeeksforGeeks Community
Languages
Python
Java
C++
PHP
GoLang
SQL
R Language
Android Tutorial
Tutorials Archive
DSA
Data Structures
Algorithms
DSA for Beginners
Basic DSA Problems
DSA Roadmap
Top 100 DSA Interview Problems
DSA Roadmap by Sandeep Jain
All Cheat Sheets
Data Science & ML
Data Science With Python
Data Science For Beginner
Machine Learning
ML Maths
Data Visualisation
Pandas
NumPy
NLP
Deep Learning
Web Technologies
HTML
CSS
JavaScript
TypeScript
ReactJS
NextJS
Bootstrap
Web Design
Python Tutorial
Python Programming Examples
Python Projects
Python Tkinter
Web Scraping
OpenCV Tutorial
Python Interview Question
Django
Computer Science
Operating Systems
Computer Network
Database Management System
Software Engineering
Digital Logic Design
Engineering Maths
Software Development
Software Testing
DevOps
Git
Linux
AWS
Docker
Kubernetes
Azure
GCP
DevOps Roadmap
System Design
High Level Design
Low Level Design
UML Diagrams
Interview Guide
Design Patterns
OOAD
System Design Bootcamp
Interview Questions
Inteview Preparation
Competitive Programming
Top DS or Algo for CP
Company-Wise Recruitment Process
Company-Wise Preparation
Aptitude Preparation
Puzzles
School Subjects
Mathematics
Physics
Chemistry
Biology
Social Science
English Grammar
Commerce
World GK
GeeksforGeeks Videos
DSA
Python
Java
C++
Web Development
Data Science
CS Subjects
@GeeksforGeeks, Sanchhaya Education Private Limited, All rights reserved
We use cookies to ensure you have the best browsing experience on our website. By using our site, you acknowledge that you have read and understood our Cookie Policy & Privacy Policy
Got It !
Lightbox
Beta
0 / 10
used queries

Logo Image
Why Codacy
Why Codacy
Customer Stories
Codacy vs Sonarqube
Codacy vs Snyk
New Research Report - Exploring the 2024 State of Software Quality
Platform
Platform
By Use Case

Clean Code
Secure Code
Unit Tests
Engineering Performance (Pulse)
By Audience

Executive Leadership
Codacy Product Showcase: January 2025 - Learn About Platform Updates
Resources
Check Icon
Blog

Check Icon
Resources

Check Icon
Documentation

Celebrating a Year of Innovation: Codacy's 2024 Recap
About Us
About Codacy
Careers
Cookies
Privacy Policy
Security Policies
Terms of Service
Pricing
Login
Start free
Chat with us
Home
All Posts
Coding Standards: What Are They and Why Are They Important?
Coding Standards: What Are They and Why Are They Important?
Codacy Quality
14/11/2023
In this article:
What Are Coding Standards?
What Are Coding Conventions?
Why Coding Standards Are Important 
Best Practices for Implementing Coding Standards 
Follow Language-Specific Standards 
Uphold Coding Standards More Easily with Automated Tools
Subscribe to our blog:
Enter Your Email*
Share:
   

Codacy
Codacy
12 mins read
The goal of any software engineering team is to create high-quality software through a fast, efficient, and easily repeatable process. But when shrinking budgets, quickly approaching deadlines, and growing customer demands enter the equation, keeping your development process effective is easier said than done. 

The goal is always to produce high-quality code that’s easy to build on and maintain—another “easier said than done” objective. According to a recent report by CISQ, the estimated cost of poor software quality in the U.S. in 2022 was at least $2.41 trillion. 

To keep code clean and healthy, development teams must adhere to guidelines and best practices that enable them to create better code consistently. We refer to these coding rules, techniques, and accepted best practices as coding standards. 

Let’s take a closer look at coding standards to understand what they are, why they’re essential, and how to introduce them into your development process effectively. 


What Are Coding Standards?
Coding standards, also known as coding guidelines or programming style guides, are rules and conventions that developers follow when writing code. These rules define the code characteristics necessary to maintain a uniform codebase and facilitate collaboration among developers.

Teams implement coding standards to create and maintain clean, readable, secure, bug-free, and efficient code. Every development team should explicitly define its coding standards based on specific team and project characteristics, primarily the company’s industry and the programming language(s) their developers use. 

When coding standards are properly defined and implemented, your developers, even those who have just joined the team, can easily find their way around your code. In ideal circumstances, you want your source code to look like a single developer is writing, debugging, and maintaining it.  


 

What Are Coding Conventions?
Coding conventions are programming language-specific guidelines that offer recommendations for keeping your code clean. These recommendations focus mainly on programming style and organization best practices. They help maintain consistency but allow some flexibility. 

Different programming languages and communities may have their specific conventions, but here are some common coding conventions that are widely followed across various languages:

Formatting: Be consistent in formatting throughout the codebase. Use an automated tool or formatter (black for Python, Prettier for JavaScript, etc.) to ensure consistent formatting throughout the codebase.

Indentation: Use consistent indentation (usually 2 or 4 spaces) to improve readability.

Naming Conventions: Use descriptive names for variables, functions, classes, etc. Follow a consistent naming convention (e.g., CamelCase, snake_case) depending on the language. Whatever naming convention you choose to use, stick to it.

Braces and Parentheses: Use consistent placement of braces and parentheses.

Comments: Write clear and concise comments for complex code sections. Avoid unnecessary comments that state the obvious. Be specific and concise. Write enough to provide the proper context, but don’t overexplain. Tools like Better Comments and Mintlify are great for helping you write good comments. 

Whitespace: Use whitespace effectively to enhance code readability. Avoid excessive or unnecessary whitespace.

Code Line Length: Limit the length of lines to improve readability. Many style guides recommend lines not to exceed 80 or 120 characters.

Function/Method Length: Keep functions/methods short and focused on a specific task. Long functions should be broken down into smaller, more manageable ones.

Error Handling: Implement proper error handling and communicate errors clearly. The goal is to identify and properly respond to errors and exceptions. When you have clear guidelines for reporting, logging, and handling errors, your code becomes more reliable and, over time, more error-proof. 

File Organization: Organize code into logical sections or modules. Follow a consistent file and directory structure.
Once your team agrees upon what coding conventions are important to the organization and officially adopts them, they become an integral part of your coding standards—which is the fundamental difference between them. 

Coding conventions are recommendations, while coding standards are mandatory, non-negotiable rules your team has agreed to follow strictly.  


Why Coding Standards Are Important 
Coding standards help your team create high-quality code and software. But what does high-quality code mean?

High-quality code ensures that your software is safe, secure, and reliable for you and your users. When your code is these three things, you and your team can expect to reap the associated benefits.

They Make Upholding Code Quality Easier 
Coding standards set the rules and guidelines that enable your team to create more efficient code that’s easier to read, analyze, maintain, and extend. When code quality is high, every developer in your team, even ones who have just joined, should be able to easily understand any part of your code and work on it independently. 

Another benefit of following standards is reduced code complexity. Less complexity and better readability make code less vulnerable to errors. 

They Make Bug Fixing Easier 
Consistent and clean code makes it easier for developers to recognize code smells and anti-patterns and troubleshoot code when necessary. It is easier to catch errors and bugs early when your code is well-structured and clean, but it’s also easy to perform code reviews and test your code later in the process, before deployment or in production. 

Coding standards also make life easier for your testers, allowing them to focus on analyzing and reviewing your code’s logic instead of fixing formatting and style errors that can slip through the cracks when coding standards aren’t being followed.

They Help You Stay Compliant 
Compliance is a key consideration when creating coding standards. As software developers, regulatory compliance requirements must be met in almost every industry and region to avoid sanctions and fines. 

A recent report by Fenergo states that international financial regulators levied $189 million in fines for non-compliance with Anti-Money Laundering (AML) regulations, including Know Your Customer (KYC) and Customer Due Diligence (CDD) in just the first half of 2023.

Some of the most common regulations teams must take into consideration when defining coding standards include:

The General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) law, which is mandatory for all teams that handle the personal data of European Union (EU) citizens. One of the key principles is that software companies must request permission before using or deleting user data. 

ISO 27001, jointly established by the International Standardization Organization (ISO) and the International Electromechanical Commission (IEC) to regulate information security management across international companies. It includes detailed regulations for creating, deploying, and managing your software to avoid data breaches and privacy issues. 

The Payment Card Industry & Data Security Standard (PCI DSS) is a regulatory framework that must be followed by companies that deal with debit, credit, and other types of payment cards.

The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) requires companies that deal with healthcare data to protect these incredibly sensitive records, like medical histories and other health-related user details. 

The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) is a regulatory body for organizations from the U.S. and those who do business in the country. Companies must comply with their guidelines for preventing cyberattacks and data breaches. 
When your team knows which regulations it must comply with, adhering to coding standards helps ensure that software meets all necessary regulations, reducing the risk of non-compliance issues and associated financial penalties. 

They Help Keep Your Code Secure 
Many of the above-mentioned regulations provide guidelines for secure coding practices to be adopted by your DevSecOps team as part of your coding standards. 

According to a recent IBM survey, 51% of surveyed organizations planned to increase security investments in 2023, adding that the global average cost of dealing with a data breach in 2023 was $4.45 million. 

Security-related coding standards offer recommendations for implementing secure access control processes so that only authorized persons can access sensitive information and functionalities. 

They also guide your team in properly configuring libraries, frameworks, server environments, and more, to protect sensitive information and limit the chances of coding errors that can lead to vulnerabilities that can be exploited. 

Following coding standards can also help you uncover potential security issues, detecting things like secrets and insecure dependencies if they exist. They also ensure you aren’t using deprecated features or outdated protocols that can lead to breaches.

They Can Reduce Costs and Accelerate Time to Market 
Every organization strives to make its development process faster and more efficient over time to save money and increase revenue. According to a 2020 McKinsey report, companies with quicker and more efficient development cycles grow revenue four to five times faster than those that don’t invest in increasing development velocity and productivity.

By following coding standards, developers can increase speed and efficiency by avoiding common mistakes that can lead to errors and issues that slow down coding processes. According to our 2024 State of Software Quality report, 58% of developers say not having enough time is the single most common challenge faced during code reviews. Coding standards also help improve readability, making it easier and faster for dev teams to understand, change, and maintain their code. 

Better code quality also increases code reusability, another big time-saver. Highly functional code can also be scaled more efficiently, accelerating and improving collaboration among team members.

When code is clean and everyone follows the same standards, it becomes much easier for multiple team members to work on the same projects thanks to the consistency that standards introduce. Coding standards often emphasize maintaining robust documentation, making not just collaboration but onboarding new team members much easier and faster. 


Best Practices for Implementing Coding Standards 
The implementation of coding standards is a very subjective process and needs to be molded to the characteristics and needs of your team.

However, some generally accepted best practices can help you get on the right track and ensure you're getting the most out of the coding standards you’ve adopted.

Be Aware of Industry Standards
Teams that develop video games and ones that work with healthcare providers have very different compliance, security, and safety requirements, making the coding standards they need to follow just as distinct. 

For example, MISRA C/C++ is a coding standard specifically written for the automotive and embedded industries, offering best practices for “the safe and secure application of embedded control systems and standalone software.”

Some other common industry-specific standards include:

Aerospace industry standard DO-178C 

Medical device standard IEC 62304 

Telecommunications standard 3GPP TS 32.105

Government and defense Common Weakness Enumeration (CWE), Defense Information Systems Agency (DISA), and Security Technical Implementation Guides (STIGs) standards
Research, recognize, and follow all relevant and established standards to meeting industry-specific coding requirements that ensure the development of secure, reliable, and compliant software.

Follow Language-Specific Standards 
Many coding standards and style guides already exist for most popular programming languages. Here’s a list of some readily-used ones: 

Python: PEP8 (Python Enhancement Proposal) Style Guide for Python Code

Java: Google Java Style Guide

Javascript: Google JavaScript Style Guide

C#: Microsoft C# Coding Conventions

C/C++: SEI CERT for C/C++

PHP: WordPress PHP Coding Standards

R: Tidyverse R Style Guide

Objective-C: Apple’s Cocoa Objective-C Coding Guideline

TypeScript: Google TypeScript Style Guide

Swift: Apple Swift Language Guidelines

HTML/CSS: W3School HTML Style Guide and Coding Conventions
Be Able to Explain the Intent of Your Standards 
Before you begin implementing coding standards, be sure that your team understands why they are important. Your development team’s leadership should take time to summarize the intent of every coding standard so that the team understands the context of each rule. 

Also, briefly define how each rule is applied in the description. Educate your team on each coding standard you introduce by providing support materials to help them understand the advantages of following each coding standard.

To illustrate their importance more clearly, you can also offer your team real-life examples of what problems could arise from failing to follow coding standards.

Evaluate and Update Standards Regularly 
As your team and product evolve and evolve over time, evaluate your coding standards to determine whether they are still effective or need updating. If the proper due diligence was performed when picking and establishing your coding standards to start with, it’s unlikely that radical and constant changes will ever be necessary. 

Industry-specific standards like MISRA C/C++ are updated every few years, as well. Ensure your team is aware of these updates when they occur and adopts any new recommendations that have been introduced. 

Uphold Coding Standards More Easily with Automated Tools
Embracing coding standards is a fundamental practice that elevates software development by enhancing consistency, readability, and security. Popular coding standards are widely accepted as best practices that have been proven to lead teams toward creating healthy, high-quality code more easily.  

However, maintaining coding standards across a project or team can be challenging without the right tools. Static code analysis tools are an excellent place to start. Tools like linters can help you automate the code review and analysis process, making it significantly easier for teams to adhere to established coding standards.

Codacy allows you to automate the static code analysis process by creating coding standards within the platform to ensure that groups of repositories follow the same security rules or coding conventions, for example. To see how it works, start your free 14-day Codacy trial today. 

RELATED
BLOG POSTS
Codacy Quality
25/10/2023
What Are Linters? (+ Why Your Team Should Use Them)
A linter. That’s the thing you roll on your clothes to get rid of cat hair, right? No, that’s a “lint roller” or “lint remover,” but the confusion is...
Codacy Quality
13/03/2023
3 popular C# style guides that will help improve your coding standards
C# is a popular programming language developed by Microsoft, and you can use it for developing web applications, games, and more. Writing high-quality,...
Codacy Quality
21/11/2022
3 popular Python style guides that will improve your coding standards
A code style guide is a set of rules, standards, or best practices that outline how your team should write, format, and organise the source code. In an...
Automate code
reviews on your commits and pull request
Get Started
Group 13
logo_codacy_white
Sign up to receive our newsletter
Enter Your Email*
Why Codacy
Why Codacy
Customer Stories
Codacy vs Sonarqube
Codacy vs Snyk
Pricing
Platform
By Use Case
Clean Code
Secure Code
Unit Tests
Engineering Performance (Pulse)
By Audience
Executive Leadership
Resources
Blog
Resources
Documentation
Codacy Pioneers
About us
About Codacy
Careers
Cookies
Privacy Policy
Security Policy
Terms of Service
Community
2025 CODACY


GIF Image
Need quick help?
Real person here 👉 👋
Beta
0 / 10
used queries
1
We value your privacy

This website uses cookies to ensure that we give you the best possible service. By clicking on “Allow all cookies,” you agree to the processing of your data as well as its transfer to third-party providers. The data will be used for analyses, to provide you with social media features, and personalized content on websites by third party providers. For more information read our  Data Protection








Skip to content
Aversan cropped logo transparent
About
Solutions
Industries
Our Work
Careers
Resources
Contact
Blog Details

 web dev
 November 13, 2019
Coding Standards and Best Practices
Programming
 
Welcome to the wonderful world of software development. Prepare yourself for an exciting and thrilling journey filled with code, rules, and more code. And did I mention there are rules? If you are someone who is familiar with coding, then the concept of coding standards is nothing new to you. You may be a strong supporter of these guidelines or a freedom fighter who believe that code is a form of expression. Whatever the case may be, it doesn’t hurt to look at some of the best practices when it comes to write a good piece of code.
It’s worth mentioning that while coding standards exist – they exist in many variations and often are merely guidelines that don’t have to be followed. Unless you want to write good code, then you probably should stick to some form of standards.

Write comments and documentation
Perhaps one of the first things you learn as a developer is to comment your code. At first it may seem like a waste of time, following the mentality of ‘If they are a developer too – they can understand it’. While it is true some of the time, commenting your code and providing proper documentation will guide the other developers through the algorithm and logic that you implemented. But don’t get carried away and comment every line of code! Obvious code should be left as is.

Write readable yet efficient code
Readable codes are easy to follow, yet use optimal space and time. When writing code you may often want to write it in as little lines as possible. Perhaps you can write an entire method or function in one line, but that only makes it harder to read and understand.


Use helper methods
It’s good practice to keep code concise and succinct. A method should only implement what it needs to do. If a part of your implementation does something else, put it in a separate method and call that within your method.

If avoidable, do NOT hard-code!
The only things that should be hard-coded are constants. That’s it.

Write test cases. Don’t forget the edge cases: 0s, empty strings/lists, nulls, etc.
This way you know what your method does, what it takes and what it should return. You will know when it should work or when it should fail. A function should always be based on test cases; not tests on functions.

Write readable yet efficient code.Conform to the coding standards of your current project
“DISCIPLINED PERSONAL PRACTICES CAN REDUCE DEFECT INTRODUCTION RATES BY UP TO 75 PERCENT”

Every project/company has their own coding standards. Some might prefer one style over the other when it comes to things such as naming conventions, file structure and spacing.
There are IDEs where you can set the preferred style, which will auto-correct you when you save. It is easier to read and, therefore understand, when all the files of the projects use the same style, naming convention, spacing, etc.

Use your IDE’s drop-down menu
Not so much a standard, but a good practice, these are very helpful and will help you make less coding errors.

For example:
If you want to rename a variable or a method, just use the “refactor” option of your IDE and it will change all the calls to that method/variable name. You don’t have to change them one by one which will make your code prone to error/failure.
If you want to create getter/setter methods of all your private variables, just use “create getter/setter” and the IDE will automatically create the methods for you.

APIs are handy
“CURRENT SOFTWARE PROJECTS SPEND ABOUT 40 TO 50 PERCENT OF THEIR EFFORT ON AVOIDABLE REWORK”
Before implementing a method, make sure they’re not available for you to use. You don’t have to code if you can just import the functionality. It makes a developer’s life super easy.
The famous saying is “Don’t reinvent the wheel” and it stands true in many cases. However, you should always consider the implications of importing a library, especially if it is third party. Aside from possible licensing issues, you may just be bloating your codebase. If all you need is a method that converts temperatures, you don’t have to import a library that does that and a hundred other things.

Pair programming/code review
“PEER REVIEWS CATCH 60 PERCENT OF THE DEFECTS”
These are very helpful when it comes to refactoring your code. Others might see better implementation to optimize your code or just make your code more elegant. It also ensures that developers adhere to standards and the work is double checked. In addition to all that, it is a wonderful way for developers to learn from each other.

BACKUP AND SAVE YOUR WORK OFTEN

Enough said. Dead battery, blackout, software glitch, fire, nuclear disaster – all of these may result in loss of data. Making sure you save often and back up your code on some kind of version control system is a simple way to ensure that your code stays safe.

Coding standards and best practices is a huge topic – one that can go on for many pages. In fact, if you ever wish to read up on Java coding standards, Oracle has just that. Application of these standards and practices also varies by application – whether you are working on a huge corporate project or helping your little brother with homework. Based on many factors, it is ultimately up to you to make sure that the code you develop is good code.

 

About the Author
Avatar
Denis Kharlamov is a Software Developer at Aversan. He has been working in an eHealth domain for almost two years, performing software testing and verification. Outside of Aversan, Denis enjoys a variety of different activities such as hiking, swimming, software & web design and development, playing video games and of course sleeping.

Disclaimer: Any views or opinions presented in this blog post are solely those of the author and do not necessarily represent those of Aversan Inc.

Sources
http://www.cs.umd.edu/projects/SoftEng/ESEG/papers/82.78.pdf

 

Share
Recent Posts
Categories
Other
Aerospace News
Aversan News
Press Releases
Past Events
Aerospace & Defence Blog
All Blog Posts
Industry News
Events
HR Blog Posts
Business Solutions
Featured
Archives

Select Year

Ready to Start the Conversation?
Contact Us
About
About Us
Certifications
Customers
Solutions
Product Development
Electronics Manufacturing
System Integration
Software Test Automation
Automated Test Equipment (ATE)
Independent Verification and Validation
Expert Resources
Digital Transformation
Industries
Aerospace
Defence
Space
Rail Transportation
Automotive
Nuclear
Medical Devices
Public Sector & IT
Resources
Webinar
Newsletter
Blog
News & Events
Our Work
Careers
Working at Aversan
Current Opportunities
2700 Matheson Blvd. E. East Tower, Suite 801E Mississauga, Ontario L4W 4V9, Canada.

1-416-289-1554

Terms & Conditions | Copyright © 2024 Aversan. All Rights Reserved.
Linkedin Icon Twitter Icon

Beta
0 / 10
used queries
1\

+1 (800) 780 8560
welcome@devcom.com
Services Expertise Case StudiesIndustries Company Contact UsBook a Call
Coding Standards and Best Practices: Guide & Implementation Tips
Home / Articles / Tech Blog / Coding Standards and Best Practices: Guide & Implementation Tips
Posted on December 30, 2024
Contents

1 What are Coding Standards?
2 Why are Coding Standards Important?
3 Benefits of Coding Standards
4 Key Aspects of Coding Standards and Guidelines
5 Common Coding Standards and Best Practices
6 Language-Specific Programming Guidelines
7 Best Practices to Implement Coding Standards
8 Popular Tools to Ensure High Coding Standards
9 Adopt the Best Coding Standards for Your Organization
10 FAQs on Software Coding Standards
Coding standards are something that each development team should consider. Without standardization, engineers can stitch code together in their own style. Collaboration stalls as your team wastes hours untangling each other’s logic and rewriting after each other. As a result, the delays grow, costs soar, and your technical debt increases.

This guide explains how globally accepted programming standards, rules, and guidelines can overcome these problems. We will describe the best conventions and practices that can make your development process faster and code cleaner. Finally, we’ll tell you how you can start integrating good coding standards step-by-step without overburdening your teams.

What are Coding Standards?
Coding standards are rules, conventions, and guidelines that dictate how to produce code. They provide a consistent framework for development teams to write, format, and organize software code across projects in a way that’s high-quality, secure, maintainable, and scalable.

With the proper implementation, these standards can greatly improve larger teams’ workflow, productivity, and privacy compliance.

Why are Coding Standards Important?
Coding standards are essential because they simplify and organize every stage of the software development lifecycle and IT operations: 

Software development. Coding standards in software engineering make code consistent across several development teams, making it easier to follow and debug.
Testing and quality assurance (QA). tandards ensure consistency in naming, formatting, and structure, helping developers write quality unit tests. This helps the testers to validate the individual units (functions, classes, modules) of the code.
Project management. With a standardized codebase, project managers can more accurately track key performance indicators (KPIs) across modules, sprints, and teams.
Knowledge sharing. A common set of coding rules and practices ensures team members are on the same page. Besides, new employees don’t have to spend too much time learning inconsistent practices.
To illustrate the importance of coding standards, let’s look at the advantages they can bring.

Benefits of Coding Standards
Don’t think of coding standards as limitations. Instead, look at them as guidance that makes the development process more manageable in the long run. Coding standards within developer teams offer far-reaching benefits to your organization, such as:

Improved consistency. When developers adhere to a unified set of standards, the codebase becomes more consistent. This reduces the likelihood of errors introduced by conflicting practices, leading to a more reliable release.
Higher code quality. Coding standards often include best practices for error handling, input validation, and resource management.
Increased efficiency. Developers and testers can improve their productivity because they will spend less time correcting inconsistent and duplicate code.
Faster onboarding. New developers can become more productive if your codebase adheres to familiar standards. Similarly, if a team member leaves, the standardized code allows others to continue the work seamlessly.
Improved security and compliance. Secure coding practices embedded in the development can mitigate vulnerabilities and help adhere to data privacy regulations, including GDPR. Meanwhile, thorough documentation makes it easier to prepare for security and compliance audits.
Enhanced scalability. By following coding conventions, you can make your software more optimized and modular. It will help the product handle increased workloads and allow you to scale components independently when needed.
Reduced technical debt. Technical debt refers to the long-term consequences of choosing shortcuts that lead to rework later. Good coding practices make your codebase future-ready, predictable, and easier to modify, lowering maintenance costs.
Long-term savings. The cost savings come from improved productivity, less rework, lower maintenance costs, and fewer risks of non-compliance.
Now, let’s look at the fundamental components of coding standards, which are more or less applicable to any organization.

Key Aspects of Coding Standards and Guidelines
Aspects are the building blocks of coding standards. Understanding them is essential for establishing an efficient pipeline that addresses all critical areas of development.

Naming conventions
Naming conventions are a foundational element of coding standards. Purposeful names make the code much easier to modify and troubleshoot, especially in large projects.

There is quite a selection of naming conventions you can choose. They include:

Camel case: Words are joined together without spaces, starting with a lowercase letter, and the subsequent words are capitalized (calculateTotal, myVariableName).
Snake case: Names are all lowercase, and words are separated by underscores (calculate_total, my_variable_name).
Kebab case: Similar to snake case, but words are separated by hyphens (calculate-total, my-variable-name).
Pascal case: Every word starts with an uppercase letter (CalculateTotal, MyVariableName).
Best practices:
Descriptive and purposeful names for code elements, such as variables, functions, and classes. For example, a variable userAge is self-explanatory compared to a vague name like element1.
Constants (values that don’t change during the execution of a program) are usually named in uppercase letters with underscores to distinguish them from other variables. For example, MAX_CONNECTIONS for the upper limit of allowed connections in a system.
Local variables are defined and used within a specific function or block in camel case.
Function names are usually written in camel case, starting with a lowercase letter.
Code formatting
Consistent formatting is about making the code look organized and easier to understand. After all, you want the programmers to have an easier time understanding it.

Best practices:
Whitespace (spaces, tabs, and line breaks) can help separate different parts of code, letting you visually organize it in a consistent structure.
Indentation is a whitespace that visually maps the nesting and hierarchy in the code, basically helping you show the relationships between parent-child elements (in conditions, loops, classes, etc.).
Restricted line length to about 120 characters prevents horizontal scrolling, making the code easily viewable on different devices.
Consistent brace style also helps avoid misunderstandings over formatting.
Code spacing goes a long way to make code human-readable, which programmers will be thankful for.
Smaller and reusable functions are much easier to understand and maintain than deeply nested code.
Inline comments
The commentary explains the purpose and reasoning behind the code segment. It’s invaluable for other developers when the context isn’t immediately apparent from the code itself.

We also recommend avoiding redundant notes that merely repeat something that’s evident from the code. As a rule, comments should be for non-obvious segments, business logic explanations, regulatory requirements, and workarounds. Alternatively, they could point to areas for improvement.

Best practices:
Place inline comments in the same line or immediately above the code it refers to.
Reduce redundant comments that restate something already expressed with the code.
Remove temporary comments used for debugging or troubleshooting once resolved.
Use specialized tools for external documentation, such as Javadoc for Java, Doxygen for C++, or Docstrings for Python.
Add headers with detailed information on how to use certain headers (module headers).
Error and exception handling
You should standardize error-handling practices for consistent responses to errors across all parts of the application. It enables your teams to deal with unexpected issues and runtime anomalies without disrupting user experience or causing system failures.

Best practices:
Use try-catch blocks to manage errors and exceptions. Try blocks are used for sections of code where errors are expected, and catch blocks contain the logic to handle it (so the system doesn’t crash).
Log errors with meaningful messages, such as timestamps, error types, stack traces, and other contexts. Additionally, use structured formats (like JSON) for easier parsing.
Configure standardized error return values for your functions, such as 1 for failure and 0 for success. This practice will reduce ambiguity when analyzing logs and debugging.
Include an auto-recovery mechanism, such as retrying operations after a short delay, to minimize the impact of transient issues (like network outages).
Version control
Standardized control systems provide a structured way to manage the codebase. They allow dev teams to track code changes and work simultaneously without overwriting each other’s work.

Best practices:
Write descriptive commit messages in version control explaining the changes’ purpose and scope. You should enforce a consistent format (like a short summary followed by a detailed description if necessary).
Use a consistent branching strategy within a version control system. For instance, in Gitflow, the system is usually divided into Master, Developer, Feature, Release, and Hotfix branches.
Enforce code reviews before integrating changes into the main codebase. It’s best to focus on reviewing smaller changes frequently instead of going through massive pull requests.
Backup code regularly using automated tools to keep all relevant versions.
Measure the impact of changes by tracking metrics like the number of bugs resolved, reduction in technical debt, and time spent on reviewing the code.
Security practices
Companies must incorporate secure coding guidelines to build a proactive defense against vulnerabilities and adhere to strict data privacy laws.

Best practices:
Use input validation systems to prevent malicious actors from injecting harmful commands into your system. All user-provided inputs should adhere to expected formats and boundaries.
Encrypt sensitive data to ensure that all credentials and personally identifiable information (passwords, payment details, health records, etc.) are accessible only to authorized users.
Don’t hardcode secrets, such as passwords and API keys, directly in the codebase. These variables and credentials should always be stored in secure environments.
Enforce the principle of least privilege, granting users the minimum level of access necessary to perform their coding tasks.
Performance optimization
Focus on writing and structuring code for efficiency and resource management to minimize latency and system overhead.

Best practices:
Use profiling to find code sections that cause the most delays. This is about focusing on parts of the code that cause the most latency and avoiding those that don’t impact performance significantly.
Minimize lines of code, rewriting complex segments into shorter equivalents. Examples include replacing loops with vectorized operations or using anonymous functions for simple processes instead of full functions.
Use efficient algorithms with lower time complexity. For example, using a hash table for lookups (instead of a list) can reduce the search times.
Adopt multi-threading or asynchronous programming to handle tasks concurrently in compute-heavy applications.
Use green coding practices that involve writing code in a way that minimizes energy consumption. It will not just enhance the performance but also improve sustainability.
With the key foundations out of the way, let’s look at the principles that work across programming languages and frameworks.

Common Coding Standards and Best Practices
Understanding these widely recognized standards helps developers align their code with industry expectations.

DRY (Don’t Repeat Yourself)
The DRY principle emphasizes reducing duplication in code. Instead of copying and pasting similar code in multiple places, developers should abstract repeated logic into reusable components like functions, classes, or modules. If multiple modules perform the same data validation, you should create a validation function that all modules use.

You can use inheritance and composition to reduce duplication. In object-oriented programming, inheritance allows a class to inherit properties from a parent class. Composition involves building classes that contain instances of other classes.


KISS (Keep It Simple, Stupid)
Systems work best when they are kept simple rather than made complex. In other words, it’s about avoiding unnecessary complexity and over-engineering.

Resist the temptation to add unnecessary layers of abstraction. Opt for the simplest algorithms that accomplish the task. It’s also about decomposing complex problems into smaller sub-problems that can be solved with simple code.


YAGNI (You Aren’t Gonna Need It)
The YAGNI principle advises developers to implement features only when they are needed, not based on speculation about future requirements. Develop features in response to concrete requirements or user stories. Do not include code for scenarios that have an extremely low chance of occurring.


SOLID
The SOLID principles are a set of five coding standards intended to make object-oriented software more understandable and maintainable:

The Single Responsibility Principle (SRP) means that a class, module, or function should have only one reason to change. If a function handles multiple concerns, changes in one concern may affect others that you don’t intend to change.
The Open-Closed Principle (OCP) states that software entities should be open for extension but closed for modification. Instead of modifying existing code to add new features, create new classes, modules, or functions that extend the existing ones.
Liskov Substitution Principle (LSP) means objects of a superclass can be replaced with objects of their subclasses without breaking the application. This promotes reliable inheritance hierarchies and helps apply the same code in different subclasses.
Interface Segregation Principle (ISP) prevents overblown interfaces. The idea behind the ISP code guidelines is that multiple specific interfaces are better than one general-purpose interface with numerous unwanted features.
Dependency Inversion Principle (DIP) means making high-level and low-level modules depend on abstractions instead of depending directly on each other. These coding practices make the code more modular and extensible.

Industry-specific coding standards
Certain industries have regulatory requirements that include standard coding practices. The same goes for safety-critical sectors that require you to use closed standards (developed by specific organizations) instead of freely available open standards.

For example, developing software for the transportation industry might require you to follow ISO 26262 (a functional safety standard in the automotive industry). Or, your team might follow HL7 standards to ensure interoperability of electronic health records.

Not every coding standard is universal—they are often tailored to a specific programming language, industry, or project.

Language-Specific Programming Guidelines
Different languages have their unique standards. We won’t name them all, but let’s concentrate on the essential coding best practices for the most popular languages and frameworks.

Java coding standards
Naming conventions: Use Pascal Case for classes and interfaces (MyClass) and camelCase for methods and variables (calculateTotal). Use UPPERCASE letters with underscores to separate words for constants.
Formatting: Use 4 spaces for indentation with braces on the same line.
Comments: Use Javadoc comments for classes, methods, and significant blocks of code.
Error handling: Throw exceptions to indicate error conditions and handle them appropriately. Avoid catching generic exceptions unless necessary.
JavaScript coding standards
Naming conventions: Use camelCase for variables and functions. File names should be in all lowercase and can use dashes or underscores.
Semicolons: Include semicolons at the end of statements. Avoid semicolons after function or class declarations.
Indentation: Use at least 2 spaces, but keep the indentation consistent across the project. Tab characters are not used for indentation.
Strict mode: Type in ‘use strict’ at the beginning of scripts when you want to enforce stricter parsing at runtime.
Python coding standards
Naming conventions: Use snake_case for functions and variables and Pascal Case for classes.
Style: The PEP 8 style guide is the coding standard for Python.
Indentation: Consistent indentation is critical, as it defines code blocks. Stick to 4 spaces per indentation level and avoid tabs.
Line length: Limit lines to 79 characters for code and 72 characters for comments.
Comments: Use # for inline comments and docstrings (triple quotes) for documentation.
C# coding standards
Naming conventions: Use Pascal Case for classes, methods, and constants, and camelCase for variables.
Formatting: Use 4 spaces per indentation level with lines under 120 characters.
Comments: Use XML documentation comments (///) for public members and inline comments (//) for brief explanations.
Error handling: Throw exceptions to indicate errors and prefer exceptions over error codes.
C++ coding standards
Naming conventions: Use Pascal Case for classes and camelCase or snake_case for variables and functions.
Memory management: Use RAII (Resource Acquisition Is Initialization) principles of managing resources via object lifetimes (to reduce memory leaks).
Comments: Use // for single-line and /* */ for multi-line comments.
Error handling: Use exceptions judiciously to signal unexpected situations that cannot be handled locally.
PHP coding standards
Naming conventions: Use Pascal Case for classes and camelCase for methods and variables. UPPERCASE with underscores is reserved for constants.
Style: Follow PSR-1 and PSR-12 for basic coding and style guidelines.
Indentation: Use 4 spaces.
File structure: Declare one class per file, with namespaces at the top.
Ruby coding standards
Naming conventions: Use snake_case for methods and variables and CamelCase for classes and modules.
Variables: Use instance variables or constants.
Parentheses: Omit parentheses in method calls when not required.
Blocks: Use {} for single-line, and do…end for multi-line blocks.
Go (Golang) coding standards
Naming conventions: Use CamelCase for exported names and camelCase for unexported names. Concise, one-letter names are often used for short-lived variables.
Formatting: Use gofmt to format code automatically. You can use tabs (equals 8 spaces).
Imports: Group imports into standard library, third-party, and local packages.
Error handling: Return errors as the last return value. The compiler often treats unused imports and variables as errors.
This only covers the essentials. If you need the most comprehensive set of standards for each programming language, read the official documentation.

Best Practices to Implement Coding Standards
In some cases, you may face resistance to change from your team. Some of them may cling to old habits or won’t understand why you want to make code human-readable and visually appealing. Besides, adherence to strict code quality standards can be burdensome under deadlines, too.

However, these practices can help you implement standard coding practices with minimal resistance.

Involve the team in defining standards. Engage your team from the bottom up, encouraging them to share their suggestions.
Start small. Begin with key guidelines and rules and gradually expand as the team becomes more comfortable.
Adapt and customize. Make sure the standards are practical and acceptable. Adapt standards to fit the context of your projects.
Document standards clearly. Create a well-defined document with your guiding principles, conventions, and rules. Use code snippets to illustrate both compliant and non-compliant code.
Provide training and onboarding. Conduct training sessions and pair less experienced developers with seniors who can help them adjust to new practices.
Recognize and reward compliance. Consider implementing rewards or recognition programs to motivate employees to adopt the new rules.
The key lies in communication, collaboration, and support for your team. However, if you lack internal knowledge, you can partner with a technical vendor to help you implement code standards.

Popular Tools to Ensure High Coding Standards
Some tools are very useful for identifying bugs, style violations, and security issues or automating other tasks that can save developers time. They can be divided into linters (for spotting logical problems in the code), formatters (to enforce style across projects), static code analyzers (to gauge performance metrics for the codebase), and IDEs (integrated development environments that streamline editing, compiling, debugging and other tasks).

Here are some of the tools we want to highlight:

ESLint for JavaScript can identify stylistic issues and potential bugs. It offers customizable rules, autofix capabilities and has a broad integration ecosystem.
SpotBugs can reveal tricky bugs, performance issues and concurrency problems in Java code.
Pylint analyzes Python code to detect errors and highlight suspicious constructs.
gofmt helps make code easier to read, review and maintain in Go projects.
Prettier formats code according to defined rules in multiple programming languages and editors.
SonarQube runs deep code analysis, detecting bugs, vulnerabilities and code smells.
JetBrains Rider IDE inspects code for inconsistencies, provides quick-fix resolutions, allows sharing of custom code configurations and syncs formatting and syntax rules.
IntelliJ IDEA can help define style rules across databases, check for violations and fix issues in real time.
Visual Studio IDE offers built-in code-style settings and analyzers, cleanup and refactoring operations, and integrates with various formatting tools.
Adopt the Best Coding Standards for Your Organization
Investing in coding standards can position your company for long-term success, innovation, and competitiveness. However, it requires certain knowledge and commitment from all levels of the organization.

Often, you need to rework large chunks of your codebase. After all, you can’t have uniformity if only some of your systems adhere to coding standards and best practices.

At DevCom, we specialize in helping companies implement effective coding standards and best practices. Our code audit services include codebase reviews, architecture evaluations, UI design assessments, and security tests. We will analyze your entire codebase, deliver a comprehensive report, and, if you’re willing, update your system to the highest standards.

Contact us today to learn how we can elevate your software development life cycle and quality.

FAQs on Software Coding Standards
1. What are coding conventions?
Coding conventions, such as naming conventions, formatting, indentation, and commenting, are widespread practices in programming. These are practices that developers agree to follow to make code more consistent and easier to read and maintain across organizations. The term is often used interchangeably with coding rules and guidelines, which are more strict and enforced in organizations.
2. What are the common coding standards?
Common coding standards ensure code is consistent, readable, and maintainable. They include naming conventions, code formatting, inline comment guidelines, error and exception handling rules, version control practices, security practices, and performance optimization techniques.
3. How to enforce coding standards?
Involve your development team in defining and adopting the guidelines. Document the standards clearly, providing coding standard examples with illustrations of compliant and non-compliant code. Additionally, provide training to help your team understand the expectations and adapt. It’s best to implement the practices incrementally, starting with fundamental guidelines.

Author:
Andriy Dovgal
Chief Technical Officer at DevCom

Don't miss out our similar posts:

Code Quality: Definition & How to Improve Code Quality

Achieving high-quality code is essential, and it's something every developer should strive for throughout their career However, the concept of quality in code is highly subjective – after all, what exactly...
November 13, 2024
The Complete Guide to Conducting a Software Development Audit

Conducting a software development audit is critical for maintaining the effectiveness, safety and compliance of a company’s overall digital environment However, software audits go beyond assessing essentials to...
November 11, 2024
12 Code Review Best Practices: How to do effective Сode Reviews

Code reviews are crucial to the success of the software development process They improve the quality of software by catching bugs early and making sure the development teams are always in syncSystematic...
October 17, 2024
Let’s discuss your project idea

In case you don't know where to start your project, you can get in touch with our Business Consultant.

We'll set up a quick call to discuss how to make your project work.

Contact us
Company
About DevCom
How We Work
Projects
Industries
Contact Us
Partnership
Services
Custom Software Development
Discovery Phase and IT Consulting
Mobile Application Development
Web Development
UI/UX Design
QA and Testing
Software Support
Software Code Audit
Source Code Review
Industries
Healthcare
Logistics & Transportation
Сonstruction
Fintech
Retail
Media & Entertainment
Sports
Sales and Marketing
Expertise
API Development
API Testing
Cloud Computing
Cloud Migration
AWS Migration
Azure Migration
Google Migration
Cloud Consulting
DevOps
SaaS Development
.NET Development
Web3 Development
Blockchain Development

NFT Development
DeFi Development
AI Development
LLM Development
ChatGPT Development
Business Intelligence
Angular Development
DynamoDB Development
Serverless Application Development
Payment Gateway Development
Billing Software Development
Tailwind CSS Development
USA: +1 800 780 8560
welcome@devcom.com
   
Latest Articles
Coding Standards and Best Practices: Guide & Implementation Tips

Best Code Review Tools For Developers [2025]

One Approach to AWS DynamoDB Single-Table Design

Code Quality: Definition & How to Improve Code Quality

The Complete Guide to Conducting a Software Development Audit

Effective Software Code Audit: A Step-by-Step Guide

12 Code Review Best Practices: How to do effective Сode Reviews

State Management in Angular Using NgRx

Code Quality: Definition & How to Improve Code Quality

How To Develop Billing Software: Step-by-Step Guide

How to Develop a Payment Gateway – 11 Key Steps

Database Unit Testing Framework for SQL Server

9 API Testing Best Practices – How to Test APIs

What’s the Difference Between API and Web Services?

Secure Your Data: How to Prevent DDoS Attacks on APIs

Introduction to Graph Databases using Neo4J

How to Build a Large Language Model: A Comprehensive Guide

Payment APIs: What Businesses Must Know

DynamoDB vs. MongoDB: Choosing the Right NoSQL Database Solution

Optimizing Your API Strategy: Best Practices for API Management in 2025

How to Write API Documentation: Examples & Best Practices

Boosting Productivity: Essential AI Tools for Developers

API Security Best Practices: Protect Your Data

Supply Chain Management: From Factory To Customer

Understanding REST API vs RESTful API: What is the Difference?

Crystal Method in Agile Development: An In-Depth Guide

What is the Difference Between CI/CD and DevOps?

13 Basic Documents For Your IT Project in 2025

Continuous Integration vs. Continuous Delivery vs. Continuous Deployment

What Are NoSQL Databases and Why Enterprises Rely on NoSQL?

3 Best Free Cloud Hosting Services For Startups

Advantages of Agile Software Development for Your Business

Benefits of Auto Auction Software Development for Used Car Businesses

Design Patterns In Angular: Best Practices

How to Migrate the On-Premise Application to AWS

How to Design and Develop Successful SaaS Application

The Nexus Framework for Scaling Scrum in Software Development

Guidance on HIPAA Compliant Cloud Hosting

How To Create .NET Bot: 6 Easy Steps

How to Do a Proper Website Stress Testing In JMeter – A Guide

Telemedicine App Development Guide

Dedicated Development Team: a Winning Approach to Outsourcing

 IT Outsourcing vs. IT Outstaffing vs. Dedicated Team: What Is the Difference?

IT Outsourcing to Eastern Europe in 2025: Benefits for USA

Must-Have Logistics Management Software To Stand Out From Competitors

DevOps Outsourcing: How it Works & Benefits for your project

Microservices Architecture and Design First Approach to API

Hybrid vs. Native App: Which One to Choose for Your Business in 2025?

How the Discovery Phase Helps in Creating a Profitable Tech Projects

Your Ultimate Guide to Writing a Software Test Document

Virtual Machines (VM) vs. Containers vs. Serverless Computing: What’s the Difference?

Cookie Policy Privacy Policy Privacy Tools
DevCom © All rights reserved 2000-2025
Beta
0 / 0
used queries
logo
Services
Technologies
Solutions
Case Studies
Blog
About Us
Contact
Polish
Home
/
Blog
/
Understanding coding standards: A deep dive into best practices
Search..
Understanding coding standards A deep dive into best practices
Gracjan
Gracjan Józefczyk
Backend Developer
August 22, 24
eCommerce
Understanding coding standards: A deep dive into best practices
In the ever-evolving world of software development, maintaining a clean, efficient, and robust codebase is a universal challenge. Coding standards are the unsung heroes that help developers achieve this goal and create high-quality code. This blog post delves into the importance of coding standards, explaining what they are, why they matter, and how adhering to them can significantly enhance the quality and maintainability of your software projects. Whether you’re a developer, product owner, or project manager, understanding and implementing coding standards is crucial for long-term success.

Quick jump
What actually are coding standards?
Key components of coding standards
Why coding standards are important
Benefits of coding standards
Our approach to coding standards
Conclusion
What actually are coding standards?
In software development, coding standards are fundamental guidelines that enhance code readability, consistency, maintainability and understandability. These standards cover various aspects of development, including code style, file organization, and how different parts of the application interact. By following these standards, developers can ensure that the codebase is clean and efficient, making it easier for multiple developers to collaborate and maintain the application over time. Additionally, these coding rules include important practices for security, testing, and documentation, ensuring that the application is robust, reliable, and well-documented. Ultimately, adhering to coding standards helps create a high-quality software product that meets user needs and is easy to manage and extend.

Key components of coding standards
Code style
Code style involves following a consistent way of writing code. It’s akin to using the same grammar rules for writing sentences. For instance, all constants should be written in uppercase letters with underscores separating words. Consistent code style improves readability and reduces the cognitive load on developers, making it easier to understand and review code.

File and directory structure
Organizing the files and folders in a specific way ensures that everyone knows where to find what they need. It’s like having a well-organized filing cabinet. A clear structure aids in navigation, making the codebase more intuitive and manageable.

Design patterns
Design patterns provide a general reusable solution to commonly occurring problems in software design. Whether you use MVC (Model-View-Controller), ADR (Action-Domain-Responder), or another architectural pattern, adhering to a chosen design pattern ensures the project’s structure is consistent and logical. This consistency is crucial for maintaining and scaling the application as it grows and evolves.

Tools
The choice of tools, such as specific frameworks, libraries, or content management systems (e.g., Doctrine ORM for database interactions or Twig for templating), can significantly influence the development process. These tools should be selected based on the project’s requirements and the team’s expertise. Once chosen, it’s crucial to use them consistently throughout the project. Proper utilization of tools can streamline development, enhance performance, and ensure that the application is built on a robust foundation.

Testing
Regular testing ensures that everything works correctly. It’s like proofreading a document or testing a product to make sure there are no mistakes. Automated tests can catch bugs early in the development process, saving time and reducing the risk of defects in production.

Security
Security standards ensure that the application is protected against unauthorized access and data breaches. It’s like having locks and alarms to keep the building safe. Implementing security best practices such as input validation, encryption, and access control is vital to protect sensitive data and maintain user trust.

Logging and debugging
Logging is like keeping a diary of what happens in the application, and debugging is the process of finding and fixing problems. These practices help maintain the application’s health and performance, providing insights into application behavior and facilitating the diagnosis of issues.

Documentation
Documentation involves writing down how everything works and how to use it. It’s like creating an instruction manual so that anyone can understand and use the application properly. Good documentation accelerates onboarding, aids in troubleshooting, and ensures that knowledge is not lost when team members move on.

While specific standards, such as using particular design patterns or tools, can vary from project to project, the most critical aspect is consistency and team agreement. Different teams may have different opinions on which standards to adopt, but the key to success is ensuring that the entire team follows the same standards throughout the project. This uniformity allows for better collaboration, easier maintenance, and a more stable and scalable application. Ultimately, the agreed-upon coding standards serve as a foundation for building high-quality, reliable software.

Why coding standards are important
Throughout my career, I have conducted numerous code reviews, implemented many eCommerce projects, and performed audits of various external projects. One recurring theme has emerged: when issues arise within a project, the root cause often lies in the lack of coding standards.

eCommerce projects are typically large-scale endeavors involving multiple developers over several years. These projects evolve continuously, requiring regular maintenance, bug fixes, and the addition of new features. An eCommerce shop is akin to constructing a building. During its construction, many people are involved, and everything must be done in the correct order—you wouldn’t install windows or doors without a roof in place. Later, the building requires maintenance as things break, floors get dirty, and so forth. Over time, expansions may be necessary—perhaps adding another floor or a garage.

Similarly, an eCommerce project relies on strict adherence to coding standards to succeed. Without these standards, even experienced developers can fall into the trap of bypassing best practices due to tight deadlines, working on MVPs, or overconfidence in their skills. This inconsistency leads to a codebase that becomes increasingly difficult to manage. Each change becomes time-consuming, bugs are harder to find, onboarding new team members takes longer, and overall maintenance becomes costly and unmanageable.

Ultimately, the absence of coding standards results in a project that struggles to scale and adapt, much like a building that crumbles without a solid foundation and proper upkeep. By adhering to coding standards, you ensure that your eCommerce project remains robust, maintainable, and capable of evolving to meet future demands.

Benefits of coding standards
Cost efficiency
At first glance, following coding standards might seem like an additional burden that slows down the development process. However, in the long term, it is a highly beneficial practice, especially from a cost perspective. The initial investment in adhering to coding standards pays off by significantly reducing maintenance costs. When developers consistently follow predefined guidelines, the codebase remains clean and organized, making it easier to manage and extend. This efficiency becomes particularly evident when new features need to be added, or bugs need to be fixed, as the standardized code is easier to navigate and modify.

Simplified onboarding
Onboarding new developers becomes a streamlined process when coding standards are in place. In an eCommerce project, where longevity and scalability are crucial, having a consistent codebase is invaluable. As the project grows and the team expands, the ability to quickly and effectively integrate new developers can save considerable time and resources. New team members can easily understand the project’s structure and conventions, allowing them to contribute productively much sooner.

Long-term stability
An eCommerce project is not a one-year deal; it is something that will last for years. The earlier a project adopts coding standards, the more stable it becomes over time. This stability is essential for handling the evolving needs of the business, ensuring that the application can scale smoothly without becoming unwieldy. A well-structured codebase built on coding standards can support growth and adapt to changes more effectively.

Handling growth and team changes
I have witnessed situations where a project started small but became highly successful over the years. As the project grew, so did the need for more developers to maintain it. Team dynamics can change significantly over the lifespan of a project, with some developers leaving and new ones joining. In such scenarios, having a project that adheres to coding standards is like having a common language. It ensures continuity and consistency, making it easier for new developers to pick up where others left off without the risk of misinterpretation or errors due to inconsistent coding practices.

Improved collaboration
Coding standards also enhance collaboration among team members. When everyone follows the same guidelines, the friction often caused by different coding styles and practices is reduced. This uniformity facilitates better code reviews, easier debugging, and smoother integration of different modules, ultimately leading to a more cohesive and efficient development process.

Future-proofing the project
By establishing and maintaining coding standards, you future-proof your project. As technology evolves and new best practices emerge, a project built on strong coding standards can adapt more readily. This adaptability ensures that the project remains relevant and functional, minimizing the risk of technical debt and obsolescence.


Enhanced quality and performance
Consistently applying coding standards contributes to the overall quality and performance of the software. Well-organized, standard-compliant code is not only easier to read and maintain but also tends to be more efficient and less prone to errors. This focus on quality helps in building a robust application that meets user needs and performs reliably under various conditions.

Our approach to coding standards
At BitBag, we place a high value on coding standards, so much so that we have created the BitBag Bible. (coding guidelines). This comprehensive document is the result of countless hours of collaboration and refinement within our developers’ guilds. It reflects the best practices that keep our projects consistent and easy to dive into. Whether it’s a client project or one of our open-source plugins, we always adhere to our standards, ensuring that any team member can confidently join a project or add new features to an existing one.

Get access to our knowledge base
Access webinars, podcasts, top blogs and more…!


E-mail address
Name
Company
The information you provide on this form will only be used to provide you with updates and personalized marketing.


I accept Privacy Policy.

GET FREE ACCESS!
Conclusion
In conclusion, coding standards are the backbone of successful software development. Improving code quality and ensuring that your code is clean, maintainable, and scalable. By adhering to these standards, you can avoid the pitfalls of inconsistent code, simplify maintenance, and enhance the overall quality of your software projects. At BitBag, we have seen firsthand the benefits of strict adherence to coding standards, and we encourage all developers to prioritize them in their projects. Investing time in establishing and following coding standards pays off in the long run, making your codebase a robust and reliable foundation for future development. Write code with clarity and simplicity in mind. 😉

Post Authors
Gracjan
Gracjan Józefczyk
Backend Developer
Recent Posts
Best practices for testing projects built on Sylius
2024: Successes, challenges and new perspectives
Subscription models in eCommerce: A guide to implementation and benefits
 Back to blog page
logo
CONTACT
Książąt Opolskich 30/4
45-006 Opole

hello@bitbag.io
SERVICES
B2B – Business to Business eCommerce
B2C – Business to Customer eCommerce
Multi-Vendor Marketplace Development
Product Information Management
Shopware/Sylius Plugin Development & Customization
Vision-To-Plan eCommerce Workshops
EXPLORE MORE
Our Products
Industries
Blog
Case studies
SUPPORT
About Us
Contact Us
FAQ
Services
Technologies
© 2025 BitBag. All Rights Reserved
We use cookies to enhance your experience. By continuing to visit this site you agree to our use of cookies.Ok
Beta
0 / 10
used queries
1
Skip links
Skip to primary navigation
Skip to content
Packmind
How it works
Integrations
Resources
Pricing
Company
Book a demo
Sign In

What’s a best coding practice and when to create it?
A best coding practice is a specific action in a particular context, it’s a way of doing things to achieve a specific result. These practices differ between companies and sometimes even between teams within the same company.

Unfortunately, it’s rare that static analysis tools (linters) can automatically identify all these coding practices, which go beyond the syntax of the code. That’s why it’s crucial the whole team is aligned with them.

With this in mind, we created Packmind, a solution that centralizes your team’s best coding practices.

A coding practice in Promyze is made of:

a name
a description
categories
code examples (positive, negative, and refactoring)

Best coding practice in Packmind
Why define and share best coding practices?
As companies aim to deliver value as quickly as possible and avoid bugs that are harmful to their business, they must capitalize on the collective intelligence of all their teams.

Accelerate has highlighted in its study that the most successful companies from an IT point of view have implemented a “Learning Culture,” which promotes continuous learning and knowledge sharing. This helps to cope mainly with:

Heterogeneity of skills in teams — everyone can learn from the skills of their colleagues and thus strengthen the team’s skills as a whole.
Turnover — newcomers can quickly become familiar with the company’s practices, which reduces adaptation time and the risk of losing skills when they leave.
Rapidly evolving technologies — best practices are constantly being renewed, new languages and frameworks appear regularly, so it is important to stay up to date with this. Moreover, on a personal level, this allows developers to remain competitive in a constantly evolving market.
When to create a best coding practice?
For the whole team to contribute to this knowledge sharing, everyone must have in mind “when” he can create a practice.

In order not to leave the working environment, it must happen when you’re writing code (from your IDE) or when you’re reviewing code (on a merge request in GitLab, for example).

Packmind plugins make this creation easier by allowing the team to create these practices in seconds.

2 main scenarios should lead to best practice creation:

A bug has been identified that stems from a poor design or code error;
An improvement has been made to the source code
Case #1: A bug has been identified that stems from a poor design or code error
“One should always learn from your mistakes.”

Strongly linked to the “Dantotsu” approach, the idea is to use each bug as a learning source. Each problem is then presented to the team, and one or several practices can emerge from these discussions.

This is obviously also true for potential bugs that could be avoided, for example, if they’re identified during a code review; in this case, the Promyze plugins allow you to create this practice directly when you add a comment during the code review.

For example: A bug is identified in an AngularJS component, a disconnection should have occurred when the component is destroyed.



And here is the associated fix to follow the best practice.



Case #2: An improvement has been made to the source code
Because the source code is constantly evolving, our practices are constantly being challenged. When a practice evolves, it’s rare to modify the entire source code of the product to follow it. It’s, therefore, common to find many different ways of doing things in the same source code.

When a practice evolves, it must be presented to the whole team, and this change must be recorded somewhere. Otherwise, it’s only local and doesn’t last over time.

These practice changes can be of multiple natures, for example:

A new concept is introduced in the codebase
Adding a new system in the app, to call when adding a new object.



Improvements in the code architecture
Setting up a new pattern to highlight the infrastructure layer level.



An example that features the outdated convention.



Performance, security, and accessibility improvements
Maintainability improvements (such as better readability of the source code).
Sure, we could list a few more, but these four examples are the main ones that would make your team want to start sharing best coding practices.

Wrapping up — start sharing your best coding practices now
In conclusion, it’s key to share practices within the team to improve the lead time and reduce the change failure rate. Tech leads must be the drivers and ambassadors of this approach to boost the involvement of the rest of the team.

It’s important not to overestimate the knowledge of other team members. Known as the Curse of knowledge, this phenomenon translates into the tendency to think that other people know the same things as we do, so we limit the practices to be presented, even though some of them are probably unknown to our colleagues.

These practices should be shared with all the teams in the company and not only with your team. They’re also valuable for the next team members, so we must think beyond our team when we identify a coding practice.

Want to discover a new way to share your best coding practices as a team? Start now for free with Packmind.

Share On
 
 
 
How it works
 
Integrations
 
Pricing
 
Company
Documentation
 
Webinars
 
Blog
 
Changelog
 
Status
 
Best practices
©2024 Packmind – Legal Notice

Beta
0 / 10
used queries
1
OpsLevel Logo
Docs
Log In
Book a demo
New year, new eng team goals? Check out our resource hub with everything you need to choose the best IDP for your team.

Share this
Book a Demo
Table of contents
Software development standards
Code formatting and style guidelines
Bug tracking and issue management
Secure coding practices
Documentation
Balancing software development standards
Benefits of software development standards
9 best practices in software development
Tools to help follow best practices
Resources
Blog
Standards in software development and 9 best practices
Insights
Standardization
DevOps
Platform engineer
Checks
OpsLevel
|
July 11, 2024
Standards in software development and 9 best practices
In today's software development landscape, standards are crucial for ensuring quality, consistency, and scalability. They establish a common guideline and framework for development teams to follow, giving platform engineers the confidence that projects are being built effectively according to the organization’s guidelines. 

Additionally, these standards give developers the confidence and freedom to work more efficiently within a well-defined framework that promotes collaboration and the production of high-quality software.

In this article, we'll explore software development standards, along with best practices for software development and tools to help follow these practices.

Software development standards
Software development standards provide a set of guidelines and best practices for developing software. These standards define a common approach to software development and help ensure that software is developed in a consistent, reliable, and efficient manner. Here are some of the types of software development standards that someone in DevOps should be aware of.

Code formatting and style guidelines
Code formatting and style guidelines are essential for ensuring that code is easy to read and easy to maintain. These guidelines define how code should be structured, including indentation, spacing, and naming conventions.

Developers should follow established guidelines for formatting code, including spacing, indentation, naming conventions, and commenting. This can include using popular style guides such as Google's Style Guide or Airbnb's JavaScript Style Guide.

Bug tracking and issue management
Bug tracking and issue management standards refer to the establishment of guidelines and processes for effectively managing bugs and issues in software development projects. While there might not be a specific standard tool mandated, organizations can define a standard approach to bug tracking and issue management, which can include selecting specific tools that align with their requirements and workflows.

The standards can outline the preferred practices for logging and tracking bugs, including the use of dedicated bug tracking systems or issue management platforms. It may also define processes for prioritizing and assigning tasks, establishing clear communication channels, and tracking the progress of issue resolution.

Some common bug tracking tools and issue management tools used in software development include Jira, Trello, and Asana. However, the specific tools chosen may vary depending on the organization's needs and preferences. The key is to establish a standard approach to bug tracking and issue management that is followed consistently across development teams.

Secure coding practices
Secure coding practices are important for preventing security vulnerabilities in software. These practices include using secure coding techniques, such as input validation and proper error handling, as well as keeping up with the latest security updates and patches. One example of secure coding practices is following the OWASP Top 10, which is a list of the most critical web application security risks.

Documentation
Documentation is an important aspect of ensuring that software is maintainable and scalable. Good documentation should include information on how the software works, how to use it, and how to modify it. This is beneficial for developers who are new to the project or need to make changes to the code.

Balancing software development standards
While following software development standards is important, it's also crucial to recognize that these standards can be misused. For example, setting unreasonable standards, such as 100% code coverage, can be counterproductive and result in unnecessary time and effort spent on testing.

Another example of the potential misuse of standards is the enforcement of an excessive amount of code comments. While documentation and comments are valuable for understanding code, setting a rigid standard that requires a comment for every function or line of code, regardless of its complexity or readability, can lead to bloated and cluttered codebases. Developers may end up spending an excessive amount of time writing and maintaining comments that do not significantly contribute to understanding the code. 

It's important to set reasonable standards that balance the need for quality with the need for efficiency. 

Benefits of software development standards
Consistency: Standards provide a set of guidelines that promote consistency in coding styles, naming conventions, and overall code structure. This simplifies collaboration among developers and enhances code readability, making it easier for team members to understand and work with each other's code.
Quality: Standards help ensure that developers build software in a consistent and predictable way, reducing the risk of bugs, security vulnerabilities, and other defects.
Scalability: Standards provide a framework for software development processes, making it easier to scale development efforts as needed.
Improved communication: Standards provide a common language and approach to software development, which can help improve communication between developers.
Reduced technical debt: Consistent standards help reduce technical debt by ensuring that the code is of high quality and easy to maintain. This reduces the time and effort required to make changes or add new features to the software.
9 best practices in software development
In addition to establishing software development standards, there are a number of best practices that developers should follow. These best practices can help ensure that software is developed in a consistent and reliable manner. Some of these best practices are detailed in the following sections.

1. Use automated testing and test coverage
Automated testing is the process of using tools to run a predefined set of tests automatically. This practice helps to identify issues early in the development process, ensuring that bugs are caught and fixed before the software is deployed.

Test coverage measures the extent to which the code is tested. By ensuring a high level of test coverage, developers can be confident that their code is reliable and can reduce the risk of future issues.

2. Reduce code complexity
Code complexity refers to the degree to which code is difficult to understand, modify, or maintain. By reducing code complexity, developers can make code more efficient, improve readability, and reduce the risk of errors.

Using code quality tools like linters and static code analysis, you can identify areas of code that are overly complex and make improvements.

3. Carry out code reviews
Code reviews are an important part of the software development process. They provide an opportunity for other developers to review code and give feedback.

Code reviews involve having team members review each other's code to ensure that it adheres to coding standards and best practices. This practice helps to identify defects and improves code quality, consistency, and maintainability.

4. Deploy in small batches
Small deploys involve breaking changes into smaller, incremental updates and deploying them frequently. This can help to reduce the risk of introducing critical bugs and make it easier to roll back changes if necessary.

5. Use feature flags
Feature flags can help reduce the risk of introducing new features into production. By selectively enabling features for a subset of users, developers can test new features in a controlled environment before rolling them out to all users.

6. Employ continuous integration and deployment
Continuous integration and continuous deployment (CI/CD) can help ensure that software is developed and deployed in a consistent and reliable manner. By automating the build, test, and deployment process, developers can ensure that changes are tested and deployed quickly and efficiently.

Your team can use a CI/CD pipeline to automate testing and improve the speed and efficiency of the development process.

7. Use version control
Use a version control system like Git to keep track of changes to code and collaborate with other developers. This approach makes it easier to roll back changes, collaborate on code, and track progress.

8. Practice agile methodologies
Agile methodologies emphasize collaboration, flexibility, and iterative development. Agile methodologies include scrum, kanban, and extreme programming.

9. Emphasize software ownership
Encourage a culture of ownership, where developers take responsibility for the software they write and invest themselves in its success. This can help foster a sense of pride and ownership, leading to higher-quality software and more engaged teams.

Tools to help follow best practices
There are a number of tools available to help developers follow software development standards and best practices.

Observability tools
Observability tools provide real-time monitoring and visibility into applications and infrastructure. These tools help teams detect and diagnose issues quickly, allowing them to respond and resolve problems faster. Popular observability tools include Datadog, Dynatrace, and Grafana.

Code analysis tools
Code analysis tools are designed to help teams improve the quality and security of their code. These tools help identify potential vulnerabilities, enforce coding standards, and provide insights into code performance. Popular code analysis tools include SonarQube, Snyk, Lacework, and Codacy.

Project management tools
Project management tools allow team members to collaborate on tasks and projects, as well as assign and track issues and progress. Popular project management tools include Jira, Rally, and Asana.

CI/CD tools
CI/CD tools help teams automate the software delivery pipeline. They provide features such as automated builds, testing, and deployment to accelerate the development process and improve the quality of the software. GitLab and Jenkins are examples of CI/CD tools that offer end-to-end automation capabilities.

Git tools
Git tools help teams manage code repositories and collaborate on code. They provide features such as version control, branching, and merging to help teams work together more efficiently. Popular Git tools include GitHub, GitLab, and Bitbucket.

OpsLevel
OpsLevel is a product that enables organizations to manage microservices-based systems effectively. This involves establishing ownership, measuring the adoption of preset standards, and even providing service templates with standards baked-in, so developers can feel confident that every new service they spin up meets their organization’s requirements. 

The OpsLevel Internal Developer Portal (IDP) also integrates with the above tools, so customers can track alerts, deployments, git repos, and more—all from one place. 

Developing high-quality software requires following standards and best practices. Adherence to the standards and best practices outlined here can lead to better code quality and streamlined development processes. However, it can be difficult to ensure that all developers are following these standards and best practices. This is where OpsLevel can help.

According to a recent customer survey, implementing OpsLevel led to improved standardization in 74% of cases and increased completion rates of org-wide initiatives in 58% of cases. Additionally, customers saw an average 12% increase in software reliability and availability satisfaction.

‍

To learn more about how OpsLevel can help your team follow software development standards and best practices, request a demo today.

More resources
What We Shipped In 2024
Blog
What We Shipped In 2024
A few of the big things we shipped this year for OpsLevel customers.

Read more
Why DORA Metrics Aren't Enough for Engineering Teams
Blog
Why DORA Metrics Aren't Enough for Engineering Teams
The DORA (DevOps Research and Assessment) metrics have been a transformative framework for engineering organizations. Based on the pioneering research presented in Accelerate, these four key metrics—deployment frequency, lead time for changes, change failure rate, and mean time to recovery (MTTR)—offer a quantifiable glimpse into the performance and health of software delivery processes. They have become synonymous with DevOps excellence, helping teams understand and optimize their delivery pipelines. But here’s the truth: while DORA metrics are a fantastic starting point, they’re far from the full story. If you rely solely on DORA metrics to assess your team’s productivity and success, you’re missing critical nuances that make or break your organization’s engineering effectiveness. This article will explore why DORA metrics alone aren’t enough and what you should consider instead.

Read more
The Pain of Backstage Upgrades
Blog
The Pain of Backstage Upgrades
Internal Developer Portals (IDPs) have become essential for engineering teams striving to deliver high-quality software quickly and efficiently. While Backstage, the open-source framework to build an IDP, from Spotify, is a popular choice for organizations building their own developer portals, it often comes with hidden costs and challenges that aren’t immediately apparent. At OpsLevel, we’ve experienced these pain points firsthand—and we’ve built a solution that lets teams focus on value instead of maintenance.

Read more

Product
Software catalog
Maturity
Integrations
Self-service
Extensibility
Book a meeting
Company
About us
Careers
Contact us
Customers
Partners
Security
Resources
Docs
Events
Blog
Pricing
Demo
Guide to Internal Developer Portals
Guide to Production Readiness
Comparisons
OpsLevel vs Backstage
OpsLevel vs Cortex
OpsLevel vs Atlassian Compass
OpsLevel vs Port
Subscribe
Join our newsletter to stay up to date on features and releases.


Email*

By subscribing you agree to with our Privacy Policy and provide consent to receive updates from our company.
SOC 2AICPA SOC
© 2025 J/K Labs Inc. All rights reserved.
Terms of Use
Privacy Policy
Responsible Disclosure
By using this website, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. View our Data Processing Agreement for more information.
Okay!
Beta
0 / 10
used queries
1

KO2 Recruitment
Expertise
About Us
Clients
Candidates
Jobs
Contact

Coding Standards Best Practices and How to Uphold Them
Home > Blog > Coding Standards Best Practices and How to Uphold Them
In the embedded software sector, a unique feature of code is that it’s designed to perform a specific function and is written for particular devices. This unique and dedicated functionality means that embedded systems are often used in medical and safety-critical contexts, which means that errors and security issues need to be as minimal as possible.

Upholding good programming practices is one of the best ways to ensure that embedded software, and any kind of software, is as efficient, reliable and error-free as possible. In this article, we explain the benefits of following coding standards best practices and highlight the main ones that all embedded software engineers should know.

What are Coding Standards Best Practices?
Coding standards are a set of rules that are set out for developers and programmers to follow when they’re writing code. They provide a framework of instructions that should be followed no matter the kind of software being developed, outlining basic practices to ensure good quality code across all industries.

Without official coding best practices, the ways that people write code would differ a lot, which could lead to a range of problems. Having a set of good programming practices sets out basic things that all programmers need to do when writing code, creating consistency and helping to uphold high standards.

Writing Code

Why Are Coding Best Practices Important?
As we’ve just touched upon, standardised coding conventions help to prevent a range of issues with software and applications, as well as make it easier for developers to write code that can be worked on by other people. Here are some more of the main reasons why software development best practices are important.

Improved Code Quality
One of the main reasons for good coding practices is that it massively helps to improve code quality. When there’s a set of guidelines outlining clear ways to make code better, all of the code that follows these guidelines will be of the same high standard. Following these principles of coding also reduces the number of simple errors that are made, which again improves the overall quality of code being written everywhere.

Reduced Costs
Following a set of coding principles helps to reduce the number of errors and bugs that are present in a piece of software. This in turn can help to reduce production and maintenance costs because less time is spent having to run tests and fix issues, as well as improving code readability which decreases the time it takes to spot errors. When code is written to a high standard, it’s also easier to reuse, which again can save time and reduce overall production costs.

Ensured Compliance
Code standards are created to ensure that programmers are compliant with regulations relating to safety and quality. Certain programming languages will have specific coding practices that link to compliance in the industry sector that the software is for, so following the guidelines is important as a way to ensure that developers don’t face issues like fines or sanctions in the future if their code isn’t compliant.

Computer Code

Easier Collaboration
When every software developer is working with the same coding standards best practices, the code that they’re all producing will be similar. This makes collaboration easier, as everyone should be following the style and formatting rules, documenting their process in the same way, and making their code readable. Therefore, any developer should be able to look at another person’s code and not only understand it but also be able to continue working on it.

Secure Code
A key feature of good programming practices is taking steps to ensure that code is as secure as possible. By using approaches that limit the likelihood of errors, and also implementing procedures that can easily highlight potential security issues, code is safer and adheres to recommended practices that ensure higher levels of security overall.

Efficient Development
Finally, following the best practices in software development helps to make the whole development process more efficient, which is not only better from a cost perspective but also from a productivity point of view. By using methods and approaches that minimise errors, streamline testing and debugging, and ensure high-quality software, projects progress much more efficiently without as many unexpected challenges or scenarios.

Nighttime Coding

9 Key Coding Best Practices
Whilst there are many common themes among coding standards best practices, there’s no universal set of principles that apply to every kind of project and programming language. Instead, coding best practices are often tailored to an industry, type of software or even a company, with subtle differences that link to the purpose of the code in question.

However, the majority of coding standards have many of the same principles, which we’ll explain below.

Naming Conventions
Naming conventions are an important part of ensuring that code is readable. Local and global variables, contents, classes and functions should all be given meaningful and descriptive names that make it easy to understand their purpose and avoid confusion when it comes to refining and checking the code.

Depending on the programming language you’re using, CamelCase or snake_case should be used. Names should be kept concise and consistent throughout all of the code, using the same themes.

Code Readability
Another good software engineering practice is to ensure readability throughout your code. This not only means that the code is easy to understand, but also that it optimises space by being concise. You can make your code as neat and readable as possible by using the naming conventions we’ve discussed above, keeping functions short and avoiding long lines of code, trying to avoid too many levels of nesting, and segmenting code blocks in the same section into paragraphs.

Code Comments and Documentation
Comments on code act as explanations and context for functions and statements. These comments should explain the algorithm and the logic applied and make it clear to any other developer what’s happening in the code and the ideas that went into it. Documentation is another way of ensuring that your code is easy to understand and that there are clear explanations about the process you followed as you were developing it.

Standardise Headers for Different Modules
In the same line as naming conventions, standardising headers is another really important part of good programming practices. The code you’re writing will be much easier to understand and also to maintain if each module has headers that follow the same standard format.

The header format that you choose should include the following:

The project that the program belongs to
The name of the module
The author of the module
A summary of the module’s purpose
Any functions that are supported in the module
Any variables that are accessed in the module
The history of revisions made to the code
Code Headers

Uphold Industry Coding Standards
As we’ve already briefly touched upon, there are different requirements for code in different industries when it comes to things like safety and quality standards. Therefore, it’s important to check the specific coding standards that apply to the type of software that you’re developing to ensure that the finished product will be compliant with relevant regulations and meet user and business requirements. An example of this is MISRA C, which is a set of guidelines for coding software for electronic devices in the automotive industry.

Code Reusability
Being able to reuse code is a major benefit in software development. Not only is it a massive help in saving time, but it can also help to improve the overall standard of a program by replicating high-quality code throughout, instead of having various qualities of code performing the same function.

You can reuse code to perform the same function in a piece of software, or you can adapt it slightly to perform a similar function. To ensure that this can be done successfully, you first need to check that the code is versatile, compatible with different hardware, and (obviously) free of errors. Once code has been approved for its suitability, it can be added to a utility module or shared library.

Indentation
Indentation is a key aspect of formatting that is used to improve the readability of code. It’s one of the most important software engineering best practices because it helps to ensure that code is organised and easy to read, as well as contributing to the overall aesthetic.

There’s no standardised way to indent code; some programmers use two spaces and others prefer four. Consistency throughout the code is the most important thing, as with any formatting practice. Other good practices include indenting at the beginning and end of each program block, nested blocks need to be spaced and indented, and new lines should be used when a brace starts.

Testing
Testing ensures that software is functional and secure, so is an important part of the best coding practices. To do this properly, unit and integration test cases should be selected and prepared before you actually start writing the new code, so that it’s ready for testing as soon as it’s needed. You should also use automated testing to continuously validate your code and ensure its functionality, which can be done with a range of different tools.

Error Handling
Error handling is an essential part of software development, and therefore the proper implementation of this is one of the coding standards best practices. Designing appropriate error messages that communicate issues and highlight failures will help to identify problems early and provide direction for fixing them. Over time, an efficient error-handling approach will help to reduce the number of errors in your code.

Code Parameters

Summary
The majority of software development best practices are relatively easy to uphold once you know them, as they revolve around formatting standards which will become second nature once you’ve been using them in your code development for a while. In the embedded systems sector, these practices are especially important to ensure that your code is serving its intended purpose and minimising the likelihood of errors, which are key features of embedded software.

If you’re an embedded software developer looking for your next job opportunity, KO2 is a specialist recruitment agency that can help you find your perfect role. Take a look at our current job openings or get in touch to speak to the team directly about what you’re looking for.

Chris Oddy
Chris Oddy
About the Author

Chris is an award-winning recruitment consultant who has specialised in the electronics and embedded systems sector since 2008. Chris is passionate about technology and customer service.

 

Related Articles
Linux Developer Interview Questions and Answers

Rust vs C++ – A Guide for Engineers

Advantages and Disadvantages of C++

What is the Best C++ IDE?

C++ vs Python

Visit our blog
Looking
to Hire?
We provide contract and permanent solutions to electronics and embedded systems businesses throughout the UK and Ireland.

Find out more
Looking
for Work?
If you’re looking for a contract or permanent role within an electronics and embedded systems business, we can help you. Get in touch below.

Find out more
Job Alerts
Sign up to our job alerts and get automatically notified when any jobs come in which match your skill set!

Register now
Pages

Home
Clients
Candidates
Blog
About Us
Privacy Policy
Sitemap

Recruitment

Expertise
CV Upload
Jobs

Information

 01423 876 356
KO2 Recruitment Solutions Ltd
• Harrogate Business Centre, Hammerain House, Hookstone Avenue, Harrogate, HG2 8ER
• Raven House, 29 Linkfield Lane, Redhill, RH1 1SS
 info@ko2.co.uk or contact us here

Follow us

© 2025 KO2 Recruitment. All Rights Reserved.


How to Keep an Engineering Notebook	Open Notebook
Microchip in a System	The Best Skills for Embedded Software Engineers
Beta
0 / 10
used queries
1
🤝Interested in working with us? Let’s talk about development for equity. 👨‍💻 [Get in Touch]

logo black
SolutionsServicesExpertiseBlockchainPortfolioPricingcontact
Code Quality Standards and Best Practices
Coding best practices
Home Code Quality Standards and Best Practices
Code Quality Standards
Last Updated: 28 Dec 2024

Author
Written By:
Muzammil K

Code Quality Standards and Best Practices
Are you a pro-software developer, or are you on your journey o becoming the most admirable software developer? Well, coding is a crucial part of every software developer. So, how do you ensure you achieve a reliable, secure, and safe code in the process? This article will help you realize the best approaches you can take to ensure code quality in software development. Keep reading for a better understanding of what you should do to improve code quality.

What to do to achieve code quality standards
Coding standards include techniques, rules, and practices developers need to implement to produce efficient, readable, and cleaner code with minimal or no errors. The developers, therefore, offer an even format as they build highly standardized code. The advantages of implementing code standards include:

Making it easy to note errors and correct them early enough
Ensuring there is uniformity through the coding process when the code is created by different engineers
To enhance faster results and to ensure efficiency during programming
To enhance the production of a code that can be re-used
To produce an easy-to-maintain, readable, and simple code
There is no doubt that ensuring code standards is significant in software development. So, what are these practices developers need to implement? Let’s find out below:

Coding best practices

Focusing on the readability of the code
With readable code, it is easy to optimize space and time and easy to follow at the same time. So, the following are ways in which the developer can achieve code readability:

Mark the beginning and end of control structures using indentation, then specify the code between them.
Writing only a few lines
Avoiding lengthy functions – A pro developer will agree that a single function should handle a single task.
Implement accurate naming conventions
Maintain short lines – It is obvious that humans love to read short lines more than long lines, whether vertically or horizontally.
Apply the DRY principle (don’t repeat yourself). You should not use the same code in the same script by automating repetitive tasks.
Include capital letters in SQL special words and functions to distinguish them from column names and tables.
Avoid deep nesting
Leave comments and prioritize documentation
Not every person who views the code is a pro developer. So, do not assume that everyone will understand the code instantly without further explanation. Developers will understand a code instantly.

So, ensure you include comments describing the code function at several points in the script. Such comments will guide the reader through the whole process. However, there is no point in leaving comments on codes that are self-explanatory.

Avoid using a single identifier for different purposes
Each variable should have a name that describes its specific purpose. As a developer always knows that a single variable cannot be assigned to numerous functions or to several values. Should you use a single identifier for different purposes, people reading the code will be confused, making it hard to put in place changes in the future when the need arises. So, each variable should have a unique name.

Ensure all headers for different modules are standardized
A person will read the code easily when the headers of different modules have the same format. For instance, in each header, you can include the following details in the same order.

The name of the module
Creation date
The module creator’s name
Modification details and history
Summary of the module’s purpose
The role of the module
The valuables which the module can access
Implement daily backups plans
During the software development process, many elements can lead to loss of data. For instance, the hardware can get damaged, a software glitch can occur, the battery can die, or a system can crash. This will lead to a loss of data, and it will only mean you have wasted time and resources. So, since you don’t want to experience it, make sure you put in measures to save the code daily after every modification. Also, make sure you back up the workflow on each control mechanism you perform during the process.

Implement Exception Handling
In the field of software development, exception refers to unusual events, issues, or problems that may arise when the code is run, then disrupting the normal execution. When such an event happens, it will terminate or pause the program execution, which will affect the whole process, and as a developer, put in place measures to avoid such from happening.

Nonetheless, there are situations when problems might occur. Should you face such an instance, use the following approaches to control or minimize the damage.

Apply real-time log analysis
Maintain the code in a try-catch block
Wait for some seconds since it might be a minor software issue or poor network
Activate the auto-recovery
Select industry-specific coding standards
The standards for coding practices vary from one industry to another, depending on the specific product. For instance, the coding standards for gaming software aren’t the same for luxury automobile coding.

So, as a developer, keeping up with the industry-specific standards makes it simple to write the code accurately to ensure the overall results match the product’s expectations. After all, the aim is to create a code that will meet business requirements, Moreso user needs.

Always implement coding rules
Checking your code against coding standards might lead you to a lot of bugs. So, you need to categorize the rules via a stern matrix to help you assess the quality of the code and determine how to fix the bugs.

The reason for assessing code quality is the decision when it is appropriate to move to the production stage. Should you detect harsh issues, then it will mean it is not ready. However, if the problems are manageable, it means you can move to the production stage and fix the issues later.

So, as a developer, ensure you prioritize defects to ensure you fix the issues with higher issues first as part of coding rules.

Conclusion
Every software developer should be up to the trends running in the industry. This is to ensure quality coding standards during the whole process. As a starter in the field, make sure you comprehend the above practices and learn how to implement them as part of your coding duties.

Finally, to implement better code quality standards and best practices in the development, consider to hire dedicated developers from Aalpha at an affordable rates.

Categories: Blog Tags: Developers, Development, Software Development
Share This Article:

Written by:
Muzammil K

Muzammil K is the Marketing Manager at Aalpha Information Systems, where he leads marketing efforts to drive business growth. With a passion for marketing strategy and a commitment to results, he's dedicated to helping the company succeed in the ever-changing digital landscape.

Trending Blogs
How to Build an AI Agent
Guide to B2B Website Design
How to Use WordPress as a Headless CMS for Next.js
How to Integrate WordPress into Laravel
Clinical Trial Management System Development
Hire Dedicated Developers and Save 60% on Development Cost.

Get A Quote
Download Brochure
Related Posts
ai agent development
2025-01-13
How to Build an AI Agent
AI evolution keeps on advancing and transforming how different sectors operate. A business environment, for instance, is a busy environment with lots of tasks to complete, and sometimes, the whole scenario can be overwhelming. This is where AI agents come in. It is now easier than before to automate some tasks, or rather let AI agents perform some basic tasks, thus simplifying your work and enhancing productivity. This guide describes what AI agents are, their features, the different types, and the process of building AI agents, among other insightful details. What is an AI agent? An AI -artificial intelligence agent…

Read More 
B2B Website Design
2025-01-02
Guide to B2B Website Design
Today, the digital space plays a big role in accelerating business growth and expansion. This is achievable through creating B2B website designs that not only focus on the specific business dealings but also what end users want and prefer. It is through a B2B website design that a user will quickly judge your business dealings and their effectiveness to what they want. For this reason, a potential user can either stay or leave in search of another website. In any case, every business owner should strive to create a website design compelling enough to have users engaged and interactive. This…

Read More 
WordPress as a Headless CMS for Nextjs
2024-12-23
How to Use WordPress as a Headless CMS for Next.js
WordPress stands out as one of the approaches you can use to create blogs & websites. Many businesses are already using WordPress to manage their websites and blogs. Being an open-source CMS, WordPress software is easily accessible to anyone for free. Above all, website owners can make several changes and tailor their websites to align with their business dealings. Ideally, you don’t necessarily need programming expertise to use WordPress for a better-performing website. But then, there is another concept you need to know: the headless WordPress and how you can configure it for Next.js. Let’s explore all these in this…

Read More 
Get Started with your Project or Take Existing one to Next Level
Proven Development Experience & Happy Clients in 41 Nations are our Pillars of Success

Estimate Project
Solutions Services Domain Expertise Outsourcing Clients Blog Articles GuidesEmail: contact@aalpha.net
Solutions
AR & VR Solutions
Blockchain Development
E-Learning Online Training India
IoT Development
Omnichannel Solutions
Services
Application Development
Ecommerce Development Services
MVP Development
SaaS Development Services
Web Development Services
Expertise
AngularJS Development
Laravel Development
Flutter Development
WebRTC Development Services
Medical Billing
Outsourcing
Engagement Models
Offshore Outsourcing
Offshore Development Center
Hire PHP Developers
AWS Consulting
LOCATIONS
United States
910 N Market St #45,
Wilmington, DE 19801, USA

United Arab Emirates
Research, Technology & Innovation Park - Block C VL02-091, PO 66636,
Sharjah - United Arab Emirates

Bangalore, India
No. 197, 2nd Floor, 5th Main,
6th Cross Gandhinagar,
Bangalore-560009,
Karnataka, India

Hubli, India
Block #10, Daimond Corner Opp.
Sawai Gandharava Hall,
Deshpande Nagar, Hubli-580029,
Karnataka India


Area we serve
Follow us on 
India +91-836-4262222 Mobile +91-9845619104 (24X7)
© 2025 Aalpha. All Rights Reserved.
Beta
0 / 10
used queries
1

Logo Image
Why Codacy
Why Codacy
Customer Stories
Codacy vs Sonarqube
Codacy vs Snyk
New Research Report - Exploring the 2024 State of Software Quality
Platform
Platform
By Use Case

Clean Code
Secure Code
Unit Tests
Engineering Performance (Pulse)
By Audience

Executive Leadership
Codacy Product Showcase: January 2025 - Learn About Platform Updates
Resources
Check Icon
Blog

Check Icon
Resources

Check Icon
Documentation

Celebrating a Year of Innovation: Codacy's 2024 Recap
About Us
About Codacy
Careers
Cookies
Privacy Policy
Security Policies
Terms of Service
Pricing
Login
Start free
Chat with us
Home
All Posts
What Is Clean Code? A Guide to Principles and Best Practices
What Is Clean Code? A Guide to Principles and Best Practices
19/12/2023
In this article:
What Is Clean Code?
Why Is Clean Code Important?
Principles of Clean Code
Write Clean Code with Confidence Using Codacy
Subscribe to our blog:
Enter Your Email*
Share:
   
clean code
Codacy
Codacy
17 mins read
Writing code is like giving a speech. If you use too many big words, you confuse your audience. Define every word, and you end up putting your audience to sleep. 

Similarly, when you write code, you shouldn't just focus on making it work. You should also aim to make it readable, understandable, and maintainable for future readers. To paraphrase software engineer Martin Fowler, "Anybody can write code that a computer can understand. Good programmers write code that humans can understand."

As software developers, understanding how to write clean code that is functional, easy to read, and adheres to best practices helps you create better software consistently.

This article discusses what clean code is and why it's essential and provides principles and best practices for writing clean and maintainable code.

What Is Clean Code?
Clean code is a term used to refer to code that is easy to read, understand, and maintain. It was made popular by Robert Cecil Martin, also known as Uncle Bob, who wrote "Clean Code: A Handbook of Agile Software Craftsmanship" in 2008. In this book, he presented a set of principles and best practices for writing clean code, such as using meaningful names, short functions, clear comments, and consistent formatting.

Ultimately, the goal of clean code is to create software that is not only functional but also readable, maintainable, and efficient throughout its lifecycle. 

Codacy can help you build clean, secure code efficiently and fearlessly.


Why Is Clean Code Important?
When teams adhere to clean code principles, the code base is easier to read and navigate, which makes it faster for developers to get up to speed and start contributing. Here are some reasons why clean code is essential.

Readability and maintenance: Clean code prioritizes clarity, which makes reading, understanding, and modifying code easier. Writing readable code reduces the time required to grasp the code's functionality, leading to faster development times.

Team collaboration: Clear and consistent code facilitates communication and cooperation among team members. By adhering to established coding standards and writing readable code, developers easily understand each other's work and collaborate more effectively.

Debugging and issue resolution: Clean code is designed with clarity and simplicity, making it easier to locate and understand specific sections of the codebase. Clear structure, meaningful variable names, and well-defined functions make it easier to identify and resolve issues.

Improved quality and reliability: Clean code prioritizes following established coding standards and writing well-structured code. This reduces the risk of introducing errors, leading to higher-quality and more reliable software down the line.
Now that we understand why clean code is essential, let's delve into some best practices and principles to help you write clean code.

Principles of Clean Code
Like a beautiful painting needs the right foundation and brushstrokes, well-crafted code requires adherence to specific principles. These principles help developers write code that is clear, concise, and, ultimately, a joy to work with.

Let's dive in.

1. Avoid Hard-Coded Numbers
Use named constants instead of hard-coded values. Write constants with meaningful names that convey their purpose. This improves clarity and makes it easier to modify the code.

Example:

The example below uses the hard-coded number 0.1 to represent a 10% discount. This makes it difficult to understand the meaning of the number (without a comment) and adjust the discount rate if needed in other parts of the function.

Before:

def calculate_discount(price):
   discount = price * 0.1 # 10% discount
   return price - discount
The improved code replaces the hard-coded number with a named constant TEN_PERCENT_DISCOUNT. The name instantly conveys the meaning of the value, making the code more self-documenting. 

After :

def calculate_discount(price):
  TEN_PERCENT_DISCOUNT = 0.1
  discount = price * TEN_PERCENT_DISCOUNT
  return price - discount
Also, If the discount rate needs to be changed, it only requires modifying the constant declaration, not searching for multiple instances of the hard-coded number.

2. Use Meaningful and Descriptive Names
Choose names for variables, functions, and classes that reflect their purpose and behavior. This makes the code self-documenting and easier to understand without extensive comments. 

As Robert Martin puts it, “A name should tell you why it exists, what it does, and how it is used. If a name requires a comment, then the name does not reveal its intent.”

Example:

If we take the code from the previous example, it uses generic names like "price" and "discount," which leaves their purpose ambiguous. Names like "price" and "discount" could be interpreted differently without context. 

Before:

def calculate_discount(price):
  TEN_PERCENT_DISCOUNT = 0.1
  discount = price * TEN_PERCENT_DISCOUNT
  return price - discount
Instead, you can declare the variables to be more descriptive.

After:

def calculate_discount(product_price):
   TEN_PERCENT_DISCOUNT = 0.1
   discount_amount = product_price * TEN_PERCENT_DISCOUNT
   return product_price - discount_amount
This improved code uses specific names like "product_price" and "discount_amount," providing a clearer understanding of what the variables represent and how we use them.

3. Use Comments Sparingly, and When You Do, Make Them Meaningful
You don't need to comment on obvious things. Excessive or unclear comments can clutter the codebase and become outdated, leading to confusion and a messy codebase.

Example:

Before:

def group_users_by_id(user_id):
   # This function groups users by id
   # ... complex logic ...
   # ... more code …
The comment about the function is redundant and adds no value. The function name already states that it groups users by id; there's no need for a comment stating the same.

Instead, use comments to convey the "why" behind specific actions or explain behaviors.

After:

def group_users_by_id(user_id):
   """Groups users by id to a specific category (1-9).

   Warning: Certain characters might not be handled correctly.
   Please refer to the documentation for supported formats.

   Args:
       user_id (str): The user id to be grouped.

   Returns:
       int: The category number (1-9) corresponding to the user id.

   Raises:
       ValueError: If the user id is invalid or unsupported.
   """
   # ... complex logic ...
   # ... more code …
This comment provides meaningful information about the function's behavior and explains unusual behavior and potential pitfalls.

Exploring the State of Software Quality 2024 Report

4. Write Short Functions That Only Do One Thing
Follow the single responsibility principle (SRP), which means that a function should have one purpose and perform it effectively. Functions are more understandable, readable, and maintainable if they only have one job. It also makes testing them very easy. 

If a function becomes too long or complex, consider breaking it into smaller, more manageable functions.

Example:

Before:

def process_data(data):
   # ... validate users...
   # ... calculate values ...
   # ... format output …
This function performs three tasks: validating users, calculating values, and formatting output. If any of these steps fail, the entire function fails, making debugging a complex issue. If we also need to change the logic of one of the tasks, we risk introducing unintended side effects in another task.

Instead, try to assign each task a function that does just one thing. 

After:

def validate_user(data):
   # ... data validation logic ...
def calculate_values(data):
   # ... calculation logic based on validated data ...
def format_output(data):
   # ... format results for display …
The improved code separates the tasks into distinct functions. This results in more readable, maintainable, and testable code. Also, If a change needs to be made, it will be easier to identify and modify the specific function responsible for the desired functionality. 

5. Follow the DRY (Don't Repeat Yourself) Principle and Avoid Duplicating Code or Logic
Avoid writing the same code more than once. Instead, reuse your code using functions, classes, modules, libraries, or other abstractions. This makes your code more efficient, consistent, and maintainable. It also reduces the risk of errors and bugs as you only need to modify your code in one place if you need to change or update it.

Example:

Before:

def calculate_book_price(quantity, price):
  return quantity * price
def calculate_laptop_price(quantity, price):
  return quantity * price
In the above example, both functions calculate the total price using the same formula. This violates the DRY principle.

We can fix this by defining a single calculate_product_price function that we use for books and laptops. This reduces code duplication and helps improve the maintenance of the codebase. 

After:

def calculate_product_price(product_quantity, product_price):
 return product_quantity * product_price
6. Follow Established Code-Writing Standards
Know your programming language's conventions in terms of spacing, comments, and naming. Most programming languages have community-accepted coding standards and style guides, for example, PEP 8 for Python and Google JavaScript Style Guide for JavaScript. 

Here are some specific examples:

Java:
Use camelCase for variable, function, and class names.
Indent code with four spaces.
Put opening braces on the same line.
Python:
Use snake_case for variable, function, and class names.
Use spaces over tabs for indentation.
Put opening braces on the same line as the function or class declaration.
JavaScript:
Use camelCase for variable and function names.
Use snake_case for object properties.
Indent code with two spaces.
Put opening braces on the same line as the function or class declaration.
Also, consider extending some of these standards by creating internal coding rules for your organization. This can contain information on creating and naming folders or describing function names within your organization.

7. Encapsulate Nested Conditionals into Functions
One way to improve the readability and clarity of functions is to encapsulate nested if/else statements into other functions. Encapsulating such logic into a function with a descriptive name clarifies its purpose and simplifies code comprehension. In some cases, it also makes it easier to reuse, modify, and test the logic without affecting the rest of the function.

In the code sample below, the discount logic is nested within the calculate_product_discount function, making it difficult to understand at a glance.

Example:

Before:

def calculate_product_discount(product_price):
 discount_amount = 0
 if product_price > 100:
   discount_amount = product_price * 0.1
 elif price > 50:
   discount_amount = product_price * 0.05
 else:
   discount_amount = 0
 final_product_price = product_price - discount_amount
 return final_product_price
We can clean this code up by separating the nested if/else condition that calculates discount logic into another function called get_discount_rate and then calling the get_discount_rate in the calculate_product_discount function. This makes it easier to read at a glance. 

The get_discount_rate is now isolated and can be reused by other functions in the codebase. It’s also easier to change, test, and debug it without affecting the calculate_discount function.

After:

def calculate_discount(product_price):
  discount_rate = get_discount_rate(product_price)
  discount_amount = product_price * discount_rate
  final_product_price = product_price - discount_amount
   return final_product_price

def get_discount_rate(product_price):
 if product_price > 100:
   return 0.1
 elif product_price > 50:
   return 0.05
 else:
   return 0
8. Refactor Continuously
Regularly review and refactor your code to improve its structure, readability, and maintainability. Consider the readability of your code for the next person who will work on it, and always leave the codebase cleaner than you found it.

9. Use Version Control
Version control systems meticulously track every change made to your codebase, enabling you to understand the evolution of your code and revert to previous versions if needed. This creates a safety net for code refactoring and prevents accidental deletions or overwrites.

Use version control systems like GitHub, GitLab, and Bitbucket to track changes to your codebase and collaborate effectively with others.

Write Clean Code with Confidence Using Codacy
Writing clean code is not just about following a set of rules but also a mindset and a commitment to writing high-quality software that is easy to read and maintain. If you're looking for a tool that automates keeping your code clean and secure as you write it, check out Codacy.

Codacy goes beyond simply enforcing coding style guidelines. It provides a comprehensive suite of features that help you write better code, including:

Static code analysis to detect potential bugs, security vulnerabilities, and code smells early in development

Duplication detection to identify and eliminate duplicated code, making your codebase cleaner and more maintainable

Code metrics to provide quantitative data about your code, helping you understand the quality and maintainability of your codebase
Finally, with support for GitHub, GitLab, and Bitbucket, Codacy can integrate seamlessly with your existing development workflow. Try it out today.

RELATED
BLOG POSTS
Codacy Quality
22/05/2024
A Deep Dive Into Clean Code Principles
Consistent coding practices become crucial as software projects grow in complexity, involving multiple contributors and moving parts. Clean code...
07/11/2023
Code Smells and Anti-Patterns: Signs You Need to Improve Code Quality
Software quality isn't a luxury–it's a necessity. As developers, we know that writing code isn't just about making things work; it's about crafting...
Codacy Quality
24/05/2024
How To Write Clean Code
When you write code, you shouldn't just focus on making it work. You should also aim to make it readable, understandable, and maintainable for future...
Automate code
reviews on your commits and pull request
Get Started
Group 13
logo_codacy_white
Sign up to receive our newsletter
Enter Your Email*
Why Codacy
Why Codacy
Customer Stories
Codacy vs Sonarqube
Codacy vs Snyk
Pricing
Platform
By Use Case
Clean Code
Secure Code
Unit Tests
Engineering Performance (Pulse)
By Audience
Executive Leadership
Resources
Blog
Resources
Documentation
Codacy Pioneers
About us
About Codacy
Careers
Cookies
Privacy Policy
Security Policy
Terms of Service
Community
2025 CODACY


GIF Image
Need quick help?
Real person here 👉 👋
Beta
0 / 10
used queries
1

Earth Engine
Search
/

English
Home
Guides
Reference
Support
Community
Data Catalog
Filter

Home
Products
Google Earth Engine
Guides
Send feedbackCoding Best Practices 

bookmark_border
 
This doc describes coding practices that are intended to maximize the chance of success for complex or expensive Earth Engine computations. The methods described here are applicable to both interactive (e.g. Code Editor) and batch (Export) computations, though generally long running computations should be run in the batch system.

Avoid mixing client functions and objects with server functions and objects
Earth Engine server objects are objects with constructors that start with ee (e.g. ee.Image, ee.Reducer) and any methods on such objects are server functions. Any object not constructed in this manner is a client object. Client objects may come from the Code Editor (e.g. Map, Chart) or the JavaScript language (e.g. Date, Math, [], {}).

To avoid unintended behavior, do not mix client and server functions in your script as discussed here and here and here. See this page and/or this tutorial for in-depth explanation of client vs. server in Earth Engine. The following example illustrates the dangers of mixing client and server functionality:

Error — this code doesn't work!

var table = ee.FeatureCollection('USDOS/LSIB_SIMPLE/2017');

// Won't work.
for(var i=0; i<table.size(); i++) {
  print('No!');
}
Can you spot the error? Note that table.size() is a server method on a server object and can not be used with client-side functionality such as the < conditional.

A situation in which you may want to use for-loops is with UI setup, since Code Editor ui objects and methods are client-side. (Learn more about creating user interfaces in Earth Engine). For example:

Use client functions for UI setup.

var panel = ui.Panel();
for(var i=1; i<8; i++) {
  panel.widgets().set(i, ui.Button('button ' + i))
}
print(panel);
Conversely, map() is a server function and client functionality won't work inside the function passed to map(). For example:

Error — this code doesn't work!

var table = ee.FeatureCollection('USDOS/LSIB_SIMPLE/2017');

// Error:
var foobar = table.map(function(f) {
  print(f); // Can't use a client function here.
  // Can't Export, either.
});
To do something to every element in a collection, map() a function over the collection and set() a property:

Use map() and set()!

var table = ee.FeatureCollection('USDOS/LSIB_SIMPLE/2017');
print(table.first());

// Do something to every element of a collection.
var withMoreProperties = table.map(function(f) {
  // Set a property.
  return f.set('area_sq_meters', f.area())
});
print(withMoreProperties.first());
You can also filter() the collection based on computed or existing properties and print() the result. Note that you can not print a collection with more 5000 elements. If you get the "Collection query aborted after accumulating over 5000 elements" error, filter() or limit() the collection before printing.

Avoid converting to list unnecessarily
Collections in Earth Engine are processed using optimizations that are broken by converting the collection to a List or Array type. Unless you need random access to collection elements (i.e. you need to get the i'th element of a collection), use filters on the collection to access individual collection elements. The following example illustrates the difference between type conversion (not recommended) and filtering (recommended) to access an element in a collection:

Don't convert to list unnecessarily!

var table = ee.FeatureCollection('USDOS/LSIB_SIMPLE/2017');

// Do NOT do this!!
var list = table.toList(table.size());
print(list.get(13)); // User memory limit exceeded.
Note that you can easily trigger errors by converting a collection to a list unnecessesarily. The safer way is to use filter():

Use filter()!

print(table.filter(ee.Filter.eq('country_na', 'Niger')).first());
Note that you should use filters as early as possible in your analysis.

Avoid ee.Algorithms.If()
Do not use ee.Algorithms.If() to implement branching logic, especially in a mapped function. As the following example illustrates, ee.Algorithms.If() can be memory intensive and is not recommended:

Don't use If()!

var table = ee.FeatureCollection('USDOS/LSIB_SIMPLE/2017');

// Do NOT do this!
var veryBad = table.map(function(f) {
  return ee.Algorithms.If({
    condition: ee.String(f.get('country_na')).compareTo('Chad').gt(0),
    trueCase: f,      // Do something.
    falseCase: null   // Do something else.
  });
}, true);
print(veryBad); // User memory limit exceeded.

// If() may evaluate both the true and false cases.
Note that the second argument to map() is true. This means that the mapped function may return nulls and they will be dropped in the resultant collection. That can be useful (without If()), but here the easiest solution is to use a filter:

Use filter()!

print(table.filter(ee.Filter.eq('country_na', 'Chad')));
As shown in this tutorial, a functional programming approach using filters is the correct way to apply one logic to some elements of a collection and another logic to the other elements of the collection.

Avoid reproject()
Don't use reproject unless absolutely necessary. One reason you might want to use reproject() is to force Code Editor computations to happen at a specific scale so you can examine the results at your desired scale of analysis. In the next example, patches of hot pixels are computed and the count of pixels in each patch is computed. Run the example and click on one of the patches. Note that the count of pixels differs between the reprojected data the data that has not been reprojected.

var l8sr = ee.ImageCollection('LANDSAT/LC08/C02/T1_L2');
var sf = ee.Geometry.Point([-122.405, 37.786]);
Map.centerObject(sf, 13);

// A reason to reproject - counting pixels and exploring interactively.
var image = l8sr.filterBounds(sf)
    .filterDate('2019-06-01', '2019-12-31')
    .first();

image = image.multiply(0.00341802).add(149);  // Apply scale factors.
Map.addLayer(image, {bands: ['ST_B10'], min: 280, max: 317}, 'image');

var hotspots = image.select('ST_B10').gt(317)
  .selfMask()
  .rename('hotspots');
var objectSize = hotspots.connectedPixelCount(256);

Map.addLayer(objectSize, {min: 1, max: 256}, 'Size No Reproject', false);

// Beware of reproject!  Don't zoom out on reprojected data.
var reprojected = objectSize.reproject(hotspots.projection());
Map.addLayer(reprojected, {min: 1, max: 256}, 'Size Reproject', false);
The reason for the discrepancy is because the scale of analysis is set by the Code Editor zoom level. By calling reproject() you set the scale of the computation instead of the Code Editor. Use reproject() with extreme caution for reasons described in this doc.

Filter and select() first
In general, filter input collections by time, location and/or metadata prior to doing anything else with the collection. Apply more selective filters before less selective filters. Spatial and/or temporal filters are often more selective. For example, note that select() and filter() are applied before map():

var images = ee.ImageCollection('COPERNICUS/S2_SR_HARMONIZED');
var sf = ee.Geometry.Point([-122.463, 37.768]);

// Expensive function to reduce the neighborhood of an image.
var reduceFunction = function(image) {
  return image.reduceNeighborhood({
    reducer: ee.Reducer.mean(),
    kernel: ee.Kernel.square(4)
  });
};

var bands = ['B4', 'B3', 'B2'];
// Select and filter first!
var reasonableComputation = images
    .select(bands)
    .filterBounds(sf)
    .filterDate('2018-01-01', '2019-02-01')
    .filter(ee.Filter.lt('CLOUDY_PIXEL_PERCENTAGE', 1))
    .aside(print) // Useful for debugging.
    .map(reduceFunction)
    .reduce('mean')
    .rename(bands);
var viz = {bands: bands, min: 0, max: 10000};
Map.addLayer(reasonableComputation, viz, 'reasonableComputation');
Use updateMask() instead of mask()
The difference between updateMask() and mask() is that the former does a logical and() of the argument (the new mask) and the existing image mask whereas mask() simply replaces the image mask with the argument. The danger of the latter is that you can unmask pixels unintentionally. In this example, the goal is to mask pixels less than or equal to 300 meters elevation. As you can see (zoom out), using mask() causes a lot of pixels to become unmasked, pixels that don't belong in the image of interest:

var l8sr = ee.ImageCollection('LANDSAT/LC08/C02/T1_L2');
var sf = ee.Geometry.Point([-122.40554461769182, 37.786807309873716]);
var aw3d30 = ee.Image('JAXA/ALOS/AW3D30_V1_1');

Map.centerObject(sf, 7);

var image = l8sr.filterBounds(sf)
    .filterDate('2019-06-01', '2019-12-31')
    .first();

image = image.multiply(0.0000275).subtract(0.2);  // Apply scale factors.
var vis = {bands: ['SR_B4', 'SR_B3', 'SR_B2'], min: 0, max: 0.3};
Map.addLayer(image, vis, 'image', false);

var mask = aw3d30.select('AVE').gt(300);
Map.addLayer(mask, {}, 'mask', false);

// NO!  Don't do this!
var badMask = image.mask(mask);
Map.addLayer(badMask, vis, 'badMask');

var goodMask = image.updateMask(mask);
Map.addLayer(goodMask, vis, 'goodMask', false);
Combine reducers
If you need multiple statistics (e.g. mean and standard deviation) from a single input (e.g. an image region), it is more efficient to combine reducers. For example, to get image statistics, combine reducers as follows:

var image = ee.Image(
  'COPERNICUS/S2_HARMONIZED/20150821T111616_20160314T094808_T30UWU');

// Get mean and SD in every band by combining reducers.
var stats = image.reduceRegion({
  reducer: ee.Reducer.mean().combine({
    reducer2: ee.Reducer.stdDev(),
    sharedInputs: true
  }),
  geometry: ee.Geometry.Rectangle([-2.15, 48.55, -1.83, 48.72]),
  scale: 10,
  bestEffort: true // Use maxPixels if you care about scale.
});

print(stats);

// Extract means and SDs to images.
var meansImage = stats.toImage().select('.*_mean');
var sdsImage = stats.toImage().select('.*_stdDev');
In this example, note that the mean reducer is combined with the standard deviation reducer and sharedInputs is true to enable a single pass through the input pixels. In the output dictionary, the name of the reducer is appended to the band name. To get mean and SD images (for example to normalize the input image), you can turn the values into an image and use regexes to extract means and SDs individually as demonstrated in the example.

Use Export
For computations that result in "User memory limit exceeded" or "Computation timed out" errors in the Code Editor, the same computations may be able to succeed by using Export. This is because the timeouts are longer and the allowable memory footprint is larger when running in the batch system (where exports run). (There are other approaches you may want to try first as detailed in the debugging doc). Continuing the previous example, suppose that dictionary returned an error. You could obtain the results by doing something like:

var link = '86836482971a35a5e735a17e93c23272';
Export.table.toDrive({
  collection: ee.FeatureCollection([ee.Feature(null, stats)]),
  description: 'exported_stats_demo_' + link,
  fileFormat: 'CSV'
});
Note that the link is embedded into the asset name, for reproducibility. Also note that if you want to export toAsset, you will need to supply a geometry, which can be anything, for example the image centroid, which is small and cheap to compute. (i.e. don't use a complex geometry if you don't need it).

See the debugging page for examples of using Export to resolve Computation timed out and Too many concurrent aggregations. See this doc for details on exporting in general.

If you don't need to clip, don't use clip()
Using clip() unnecessarily will increase computation time. Avoid clip() unless it's necessary to your analysis. If you're not sure, don't clip. An example of a bad use of clip:

Don't clip inputs unnecessarily!

var table = ee.FeatureCollection('USDOS/LSIB_SIMPLE/2017');
var l8sr = ee.ImageCollection('LANDSAT/LC08/C02/T1_L2');

var belgium = table.filter(ee.Filter.eq('country_na', 'Belgium')).first();

// Do NOT clip unless you need to.
var unnecessaryClip = l8sr
    .select('SR_B4')                          // Good.
    .filterBounds(belgium.geometry())         // Good.
    .filterDate('2019-01-01', '2019-04-01')   // Good.
    .map(function(image) {
      return image.clip(belgium.geometry());  // NO! Bad! Not necessary.
    })
    .median()
    .reduceRegion({
      reducer: ee.Reducer.mean(),
      geometry: belgium.geometry(),
      scale: 30,
      maxPixels: 1e10,
    });
print(unnecessaryClip);
Clipping the input images can be skipped entirely, because the region is specified in the reduceRegion() call:

Specify the region for the output!

var noClipNeeded = l8sr
    .select('SR_B4')                           // Good.
    .filterBounds(belgium.geometry())          // Good.
    .filterDate('2019-01-01', '2019-12-31') // Good.
    .median()
    .reduceRegion({
      reducer: ee.Reducer.mean(),
      geometry: belgium.geometry(), // Geometry is specified here.
      scale: 30,
      maxPixels: 1e10,
    });
print(noClipNeeded);
If this computation times out, Export it as in this example.

If you need to clip with a complex collection, use clipToCollection()
If you really need to clip something, and the geometries you want to use for clipping are in a collection, use clipToCollection():

var ecoregions = ee.FeatureCollection('RESOLVE/ECOREGIONS/2017');
var image = ee.Image('JAXA/ALOS/AW3D30_V1_1');

var complexCollection = ecoregions
    .filter(ee.Filter.eq('BIOME_NAME',
                         'Tropical & Subtropical Moist Broadleaf Forests'));
Map.addLayer(complexCollection, {}, 'complexCollection');

var clippedTheRightWay = image.select('AVE')
    .clipToCollection(complexCollection);
Map.addLayer(clippedTheRightWay, {}, 'clippedTheRightWay', false);
Do NOT use featureCollection.geometry() or featureCollection.union() on large and/or complex collections, which can be more memory intensive.

Don't use a complex collection as the region for a reducer
If you need to do a spatial reduction such that the reducer pools inputs from multiple regions in a FeatureCollection, don't supply featureCollection.geometry() as the geometry input to the reducer. Instead, use clipToCollection() and a region large enough to encompass the bounds of the collection. For example:

var ecoregions = ee.FeatureCollection('RESOLVE/ECOREGIONS/2017');
var image = ee.Image('JAXA/ALOS/AW3D30_V1_1');

var complexCollection = ecoregions
    .filter(ee.Filter.eq('BIOME_NAME', 'Tropical & Subtropical Moist Broadleaf Forests'));

var clippedTheRightWay = image.select('AVE')
    .clipToCollection(complexCollection);
Map.addLayer(clippedTheRightWay, {}, 'clippedTheRightWay');

var reduction = clippedTheRightWay.reduceRegion({
  reducer: ee.Reducer.mean(),
  geometry: ee.Geometry.Rectangle({
    coords: [-179.9, -50, 179.9, 50],  // Almost global.
    geodesic: false
  }),
  scale: 30,
  maxPixels: 1e12
});
print(reduction); // If this times out, export it.
Use a non-zero errorMargin
For possibly expensive geometry operations, use the largest error margin possible given the required precision of the computation. The error margin specifies the maximum allowable error (in meters) permitted during operations on geometries (e.g. during reprojection). Specifying a small error margin can result in the need to densify geometries (with coordinates), which can be memory intensive. It's good practice to specify as large an error margin as possible for your computation:

var ecoregions = ee.FeatureCollection('RESOLVE/ECOREGIONS/2017');

var complexCollection = ecoregions.limit(10);
Map.centerObject(complexCollection);
Map.addLayer(complexCollection);

var expensiveOps = complexCollection.map(function(f) {
  return f.buffer(10000, 200).bounds(200);
});
Map.addLayer(expensiveOps, {}, 'expensiveOps');
Don't use a ridiculously small scale with reduceToVectors()
If you want to convert a raster to a vector, use an appropriate scale. Specifying a very small scale can substantially increase computation cost. Set scale as high as possible give the required precision. For example, to get polygons representing global land masses:

var etopo = ee.Image('NOAA/NGDC/ETOPO1');

// Approximate land boundary.
var bounds = etopo.select(0).gt(-100);

// Non-geodesic polygon.
var almostGlobal = ee.Geometry.Polygon({
  coords: [[-180, -80], [180, -80], [180, 80], [-180, 80], [-180, -80]],
  geodesic: false
});
Map.addLayer(almostGlobal, {}, 'almostGlobal');

var vectors = bounds.selfMask().reduceToVectors({
  reducer: ee.Reducer.countEvery(),
  geometry: almostGlobal,
  // Set the scale to the maximum possible given
  // the required precision of the computation.
  scale: 50000,
});
Map.addLayer(vectors, {}, 'vectors');
In the previous example, note the use of a non-geodesic polygon for use in global reductions.

Don't use reduceToVectors() with reduceRegions()
Don't use a FeatureCollection returned by reduceToVectors() as an input to reduceRegions(). Instead, add the bands you want to reduce before calling reduceToVectors():

var etopo = ee.Image('NOAA/NGDC/ETOPO1');
var mod11a1 = ee.ImageCollection('MODIS/006/MOD11A1');

// Approximate land boundary.
var bounds = etopo.select(0).gt(-100);

// Non-geodesic polygon.
var almostGlobal = ee.Geometry.Polygon({
  coords: [[-180, -80], [180, -80], [180, 80], [-180, 80], [-180, -80]],
  geodesic: false
});

var lst = mod11a1.first().select(0);

var means = bounds.selfMask().addBands(lst).reduceToVectors({
  reducer: ee.Reducer.mean(),
  geometry: almostGlobal,
  scale: 1000,
  maxPixels: 1e10
});
print(means.limit(10));
Note that other ways of reducing pixels of one image within zones of another include reduceConnectedCommponents() and/or grouping reducers.

Use fastDistanceTransform() for neighborhood operations
For some convolution operations, fastDistanceTransform() may be more efficient than reduceNeighborhood() or convolve(). For example, to do erosion and/or dilation of binary inputs:

var aw3d30 = ee.Image('JAXA/ALOS/AW3D30_V1_1');

// Make a simple binary layer from a threshold on elevation.
var mask = aw3d30.select('AVE').gt(300);
Map.setCenter(-122.0703, 37.3872, 11);
Map.addLayer(mask, {}, 'mask');

// Distance in pixel units.
var distance = mask.fastDistanceTransform().sqrt();
// Threshold on distance (three pixels) for a dilation.
var dilation = distance.lt(3);
Map.addLayer(dilation, {}, 'dilation');

// Do the reverse for an erosion.
var notDistance = mask.not().fastDistanceTransform().sqrt();
var erosion = notDistance.gt(3);
Map.addLayer(erosion, {}, 'erosion');
Use the optimizations in reduceNeighborhood()
If you need to perform a convolution and can't use fastDistanceTransform(), use the optimizations in reduceNeighborhood().

var l8raw = ee.ImageCollection('LANDSAT/LC08/C02/T1_RT');
var composite = ee.Algorithms.Landsat.simpleComposite(l8raw);

var bands = ['B4', 'B3', 'B2'];

var optimizedConvolution = composite.select(bands).reduceNeighborhood({
  reducer: ee.Reducer.mean(),
  kernel: ee.Kernel.square(3),
  optimization: 'boxcar' // Suitable optimization for mean.
}).rename(bands);

var viz = {bands: bands, min: 0, max: 72};
Map.setCenter(-122.0703, 37.3872, 11);
Map.addLayer(composite, viz, 'composite');
Map.addLayer(optimizedConvolution, viz, 'optimizedConvolution');
Don't sample more data than you need
Resist the urge to increase your training dataset size unnecessarily. Although increasing the amount of training data is an effective machine learning strategy in some circumstances, it can also increase computational cost with no corresponding increase in accuracy. (For an understanding of when to increase training dataset size, see this reference). The following example demonstrates how requesting too much training data can result in the dreaded "Computed value is too large" error:

Don't sample too much data!

var l8raw = ee.ImageCollection('LANDSAT/LC08/C02/T1_RT');
var composite = ee.Algorithms.Landsat.simpleComposite(l8raw);
var labels = ee.FeatureCollection('projects/google/demo_landcover_labels');

// No!  Not necessary.  Don't do this:
labels = labels.map(function(f) { return f.buffer(100000, 1000); });

var bands = ['B2', 'B3', 'B4', 'B5', 'B6', 'B7'];

var training = composite.select(bands).sampleRegions({
  collection: labels,
  properties: ['landcover'],
  scale: 30
});

var classifier = ee.Classifier.smileCart().train({
  features: training,
  classProperty: 'landcover',
  inputProperties: bands
});
print(classifier.explain()); // Computed value is too large
The better approach is to start with a moderate amount of data and tune the hyperparameters of the classifier to determine if you can achieve your desired accuracy:

Tune hyperparameters!

var l8raw = ee.ImageCollection('LANDSAT/LC08/C02/T1_RT');
var composite = ee.Algorithms.Landsat.simpleComposite(l8raw);
var labels = ee.FeatureCollection('projects/google/demo_landcover_labels');

// Increase the data a little bit, possibly introducing noise.
labels = labels.map(function(f) { return f.buffer(100, 10); });

var bands = ['B2', 'B3', 'B4', 'B5', 'B6', 'B7'];

var data = composite.select(bands).sampleRegions({
  collection: labels,
  properties: ['landcover'],
  scale: 30
});

// Add a column of uniform random numbers called 'random'.
data = data.randomColumn();

// Partition into training and testing.
var training = data.filter(ee.Filter.lt('random', 0.5));
var testing = data.filter(ee.Filter.gte('random', 0.5));

// Tune the minLeafPopulation parameter.
var minLeafPops = ee.List.sequence(1, 10);

var accuracies = minLeafPops.map(function(p) {
  var classifier = ee.Classifier.smileCart({minLeafPopulation: p})
      .train({
        features: training,
        classProperty: 'landcover',
        inputProperties: bands
      });

  return testing
    .classify(classifier)
    .errorMatrix('landcover', 'classification')
    .accuracy();
});

print(ui.Chart.array.values({
  array: ee.Array(accuracies),
  axis: 0,
  xLabels: minLeafPops
}));
In this example, the classifier is already very accurate, so there's not much tuning to do. You might want to choose the smallest tree possible (i.e. largest minLeafPopulation) that still has the required accuracy.

Export intermediate results
Suppose your objective is to take samples from a relatively complex computed image. It is often more efficient to Export the image toAsset(), load the exported image, then sample. For example:

var image = ee.Image('UMD/hansen/global_forest_change_2018_v1_6');
var geometry = ee.Geometry.Polygon(
    [[[-76.64069800085349, 5.511777325802095],
      [-76.64069800085349, -20.483938229362376],
      [-35.15632300085349, -20.483938229362376],
      [-35.15632300085349, 5.511777325802095]]], null, false);
var testRegion = ee.Geometry.Polygon(
    [[[-48.86726050085349, -3.0475996402515717],
      [-48.86726050085349, -3.9248707849303295],
      [-47.46101050085349, -3.9248707849303295],
      [-47.46101050085349, -3.0475996402515717]]], null, false);

// Forest loss in 2016, to stratify a sample.
var loss = image.select('lossyear');
var loss16 = loss.eq(16).rename('loss16');

// Scales and masks Landsat 8 surface reflectance images.
function prepSrL8(image) {
  var qaMask = image.select('QA_PIXEL').bitwiseAnd(parseInt('11111', 2)).eq(0);
  var opticalBands = image.select('SR_B.').multiply(0.0000275).add(-0.2);
  var thermalBands = image.select('ST_B.*').multiply(0.00341802).add(149.0);
  return image.addBands(opticalBands, null, true)
      .addBands(thermalBands, null, true)
      .updateMask(qaMask);
}

var collection = ee.ImageCollection('LANDSAT/LC08/C02/T1_L2')
    .map(prepSrL8);

// Create two annual cloud-free composites.
var composite1 = collection.filterDate('2015-01-01', '2015-12-31').median();
var composite2 = collection.filterDate('2017-01-01', '2017-12-31').median();

// We want a strtatified sample of this stack.
var stack = composite1.addBands(composite2)
    .float(); // Export the smallest size possible.

// Export the image.  This block is commented because the export is complete.
/*
var link = '0b8023b0af6c1b0ac7b5be649b54db06'
var desc = 'Logistic_regression_stack_' + link;
Export.image.toAsset({
  image: stack,
  description: desc,
  assetId: desc,
  region: geometry,
  scale: 30,
  maxPixels: 1e10
})
*/

// Load the exported image.
var exportedStack = ee.Image(
  'projects/google/Logistic_regression_stack_0b8023b0af6c1b0ac7b5be649b54db06');

// Take a very small sample first, to debug.
var testSample = exportedStack.addBands(loss16).stratifiedSample({
  numPoints: 1,
  classBand: 'loss16',
  region: testRegion,
  scale: 30,
  geometries: true
});
print(testSample); // Check this in the console.

// Take a large sample.
var sample = exportedStack.addBands(loss16).stratifiedSample({
  numPoints: 10000,
  classBand: 'loss16',
  region: geometry,
  scale: 30,
});

// Export the large sample...
In this example, note that the imagery is exported as float. Don't export at double precision unless absolutely necessary. When doing this export, note that a Code Editor link (obtained immediately prior to export) is embedded in the filename for reproduceability.

Once the export is completed, reload the asset and proceed with sampling from it. Note that a very small sample over a very small test area is run first, for debugging. When that is shown to succeed, take a larger sample and export it. Such large samples typically need to be exported. Do not expect such samples to be available interactively (for example through print()) or usable (for example as input to a classifier) without exporting them first.

Join vs. map-filter
Suppose you want to join collections based on time, location or some metadata property. Generally, this is most efficiently accomplished with a join. The following example does a spatio-temporal join between the Landsat 8 and Sentinel-2 collections:

var s2 = ee.ImageCollection('COPERNICUS/S2_HARMONIZED')
    .filterBounds(ee.Geometry.Point([-2.0205, 48.647]));

var l8 = ee.ImageCollection('LANDSAT/LC08/C02/T1_L2');

var joined = ee.Join.saveAll('landsat').apply({
  primary: s2,
  secondary: l8,
  condition: ee.Filter.and(
    ee.Filter.maxDifference({
      difference: 1000 * 60 * 60 * 24, // One day in milliseconds
      leftField: 'system:time_start',
      rightField: 'system:time_start',
    }),
    ee.Filter.intersects({
      leftField: '.geo',
      rightField: '.geo',
    })
  )
});
print(joined);
Although you should try a join first (Export if needed), occasionally a filter() within a map() can also be effective, particularly for very large collections.

var s2 = ee.ImageCollection('COPERNICUS/S2_HARMONIZED')
    .filterBounds(ee.Geometry.Point([-2.0205, 48.647]));

var l8 = ee.ImageCollection('LANDSAT/LC08/C02/T1_L2');

var mappedFilter = s2.map(function(image) {
  var date = image.date();
  var landsat = l8
      .filterBounds(image.geometry())
      .filterDate(date.advance(-1, 'day'), date.advance(1, 'day'));
  // Return the input image with matching scenes in a property.
  return image.set({
    landsat: landsat,
    size: landsat.size()
  });
}).filter(ee.Filter.gt('size', 0));
print(mappedFilter);
reduceRegion() vs. reduceRegions() vs. for-loop
Calling reduceRegions() with a very large or complex FeatureCollection as input may result in the dreaded "Computed value is too large" error. One potential solution is to map reduceRegion() over the FeatureCollection instead. Another potential solution is to use a (gasp) for-loop. Although this is strongly discouraged in Earth Engine as described here, here and here, reduceRegion() can be implemented in a for-loop to perform large reductions.

Suppose your objective is to obtain the mean of pixels (or any statistic) in each feature in a FeatureCollection for each image in an ImageCollection. The following example compares the three approaches previously described:

// Table of countries.
var countriesTable = ee.FeatureCollection("USDOS/LSIB_SIMPLE/2017");
// Time series of images.
var mod13a1 = ee.ImageCollection("MODIS/006/MOD13A1");

// MODIS vegetation indices (always use the most recent version).
var band = 'NDVI';
var imagery = mod13a1.select(band);

// Option 1: reduceRegions()
var testTable = countriesTable.limit(1); // Do this outside map()s and loops.
var data = imagery.map(function(image) {
  return image.reduceRegions({
    collection: testTable,
    reducer: ee.Reducer.mean(),
    scale: 500
  }).map(function(f) {
    return f.set({
      time: image.date().millis(),
      date: image.date().format()
    });
  });
}).flatten();
print(data.first());

// Option 2: mapped reduceRegion()
var data = countriesTable.map(function(feature) {
  return imagery.map(function(image) {
    return ee.Feature(feature.geometry().centroid(100),
        image.reduceRegion({
          reducer: ee.Reducer.mean(),
          geometry: feature.geometry(),
          scale: 500
        })).set({
          time: image.date().millis(),
          date: image.date().format()
        }).copyProperties(feature);
  });
}).flatten();
print(data.first());

// Option 3: for-loop (WATCH OUT!)
var size = countriesTable.size();
// print(size); // 312
var countriesList = countriesTable.toList(1); // Adjust size.
var data = ee.FeatureCollection([]); // Empty table.
for (var j=0; j<1; j++) { // Adjust size.
  var feature = ee.Feature(countriesList.get(j));
  // Convert ImageCollection > FeatureCollection
  var fc = ee.FeatureCollection(imagery.map(function(image) {
    return ee.Feature(feature.geometry().centroid(100),
        image.reduceRegion({
          reducer: ee.Reducer.mean(),
          geometry: feature.geometry(),
          scale: 500
        })).set({
          time: image.date().millis(),
          date: image.date().format()
        }).copyProperties(feature);
  }));
  data = data.merge(fc);
}
print(data.first());
Note that the first() thing from each collection is printed, for debugging purposes. You should not expect that the complete result will be available interactively: you'll need to Export. Also note that for-loops should be used with extreme caution and only as a last resort. Finally, the for-loop requires manually obtaining the size of the input collection and hardcoding that in the appropriate locations. If any of that sounds unclear to you, don't use a for-loop.

Use forward differencing for neighbors in time
Suppose you have a temporally sorted ImageCollection (i.e. a time series) and you want to compare each image to the previous (or next) image. Rather than use iterate() for this purpose, it may be more efficient to use an array-based forward differencing. The following example uses this method to de-duplicate the Sentinel-2 collection, where duplicates are defined as images with the same day of year:

var sentinel2 = ee.ImageCollection('COPERNICUS/S2_HARMONIZED');
var sf = ee.Geometry.Point([-122.47555371521855, 37.76884708376152]);
var s2 = sentinel2
    .filterBounds(sf)
    .filterDate('2018-01-01', '2019-12-31');

var withDoys = s2.map(function(image) {
  var ndvi = image.normalizedDifference(['B4', 'B8']).rename('ndvi');
  var date = image.date();
  var doy = date.getRelative('day', 'year');
  var time = image.metadata('system:time_start');
  var doyImage = ee.Image(doy)
      .rename('doy')
      .int();
  return ndvi.addBands(doyImage).addBands(time)
      .clip(image.geometry()); // Appropriate use of clip.
});

var array = withDoys.toArray();
var timeAxis = 0;
var bandAxis = 1;

var dedupe = function(array) {
  var time = array.arraySlice(bandAxis, -1);
  var sorted = array.arraySort(time);
  var doy = sorted.arraySlice(bandAxis, -2, -1);
  var left = doy.arraySlice(timeAxis, 1);
  var right = doy.arraySlice(timeAxis, 0, -1);
  var mask = ee.Image(ee.Array([[1]]))
      .arrayCat(left.neq(right), timeAxis);
  return array.arrayMask(mask);
};

var deduped = dedupe(array);

// Inspect these outputs to confirm that duplicates have been removed.
print(array.reduceRegion('first', sf, 10));
print(deduped.reduceRegion('first', sf, 10));
Inspect the printed collections to verify that duplicates have been removed.

Send feedback
Except as otherwise noted, the content of this page is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License, and code samples are licensed under the Apache 2.0 License. For details, see the Google Developers Site Policies. Java is a registered trademark of Oracle and/or its affiliates.

Last updated 2024-07-16 UTC.

GitHubGitHub
Earth Engine on GitHub
MediumMedium
Follow our blog on Medium
GIS Stack ExchangeGIS Stack Exchange
Ask questions using the google-earth-engine tag
TwitterTwitter
Follow @googleearth on Twitter
VideosVideos
Earth Engine on YouTube
Connect
Blog
Instagram
LinkedIn
X (Twitter)
YouTube
Programs
Women Techmakers
Google Developer Groups
Google Developer Experts
Accelerators
Developer consoles
Google API Console
Google Cloud Platform Console
Google Play Console
Firebase Console
Actions on Google Console
Cast SDK Developer Console
Chrome Web Store Dashboard
Google Home Developer Console
Google Developers
Android
Chrome
Firebase
Google Cloud Platform
Google AI
All products
Terms
Privacy
Sign up for the Google for Developers newsletter
Subscribe

English
Page info
bug_report
fullscreen
close
On this page
Beta
0 / 10
used queries
1

Home
Documentation
Try Kodezi
News
·
Sep 6, 2024
·
37 min read
Mastering Coding Standards: Best Practices and Examples
Kodezi Content Team
Master coding standards for readable, efficient, and secure code.

Mastering Coding Standards: Best Practices and Examples

Table of Contents
Introduction
Importance of Consistent Coding Standards
Navigating Coding Logic Rules
Using Structs for Clarity in Function Arguments
Ensuring Data Integrity Through Validation
Formatting Rules for Readable Code
Best Practices for Code Readability
Maintaining Code Quality and Security
Involving Developers in Defining Standards
Tools for Ensuring Adherence to Standards
Code Reviews and Refactoring Best Practices
Performance Optimization Techniques
Version Control and Collaboration
Real-World Examples and Case Studies
Conclusion
Introduction
Adhering to coding standards in JavaScript is not just about making the code look pretty; it's a strategic approach that enhances collaboration and efficiency among developers. As JavaScript continues to reign as a powerhouse in creating interactive and dynamic web applications, the importance of clean, readable, and maintainable code can't be overstated. Developers who are on the same page regarding coding conventions can seamlessly navigate and troubleshoot each other's code, leading to a more cohesive development process and reducing the time spent deciphering disparate coding styles.

In practice, clean code in JavaScript translates to a more intuitive understanding of the codebase, allowing developers to focus on innovation rather than getting bogged down by code complexity. This is especially critical in a remote working environment, where direct communication is often replaced by virtual meetings, making clear and consistent code a linchpin for successful team interactions. Furthermore, with JavaScript's ubiquity in modern web development, the ability to quickly adapt and understand code during peer reviews or when joining a new project team is indispensable.

Ultimately, the pursuit of clean code in JavaScript is a testament to the language's versatility and the developer community's commitment to excellence. It is an ongoing dialogue within teams and among individual developers, seeking to define and refine the essence of what makes code not only functional but also a joy to work with. By embracing coding standards, developers empower themselves and their teams to build robust, sustainable, and accessible digital solutions that stand the test of time.

Importance of Consistent Coding Standards
Adhering to coding standards in JavaScript is not just about making the code look pretty; it's a strategic approach that enhances collaboration and efficiency among developers. As JavaScript continues to reign as a powerhouse in creating interactive and dynamic web applications, the importance of clean, readable, and maintainable code can't be overstated. Developers who are on the same page regarding coding conventions can seamlessly navigate and troubleshoot each other's code, leading to a more cohesive development process and reducing the time spent deciphering disparate coding styles.

In practice, clean code in JavaScript translates to a more intuitive understanding of the codebase, allowing developers to focus on innovation rather than getting bogged down by code complexity. This is especially critical in a remote working environment, where direct communication is often replaced by virtual meetings, making clear and consistent code a linchpin for successful team interactions. Furthermore, with JavaScript's ubiquity in modern web development, the ability to quickly adapt and understand code during peer reviews or when joining a new project team is indispensable.

Ultimately, the pursuit of clean code in JavaScript is a testament to the language's versatility and the developer community's commitment to excellence. It is an ongoing dialogue within teams and among individual developers, seeking to define and refine the essence of what makes code not only functional but also a joy to work with. By embracing coding standards, developers empower themselves and their teams to build robust, sustainable, and accessible digital solutions that stand the test of time.

Navigating Coding Logic Rules
To write JavaScript code that stands the test of time and collaboration, adhering to coding logic rules is paramount. Logical operations, the bedrock of decision-making and program flow in JavaScript, must be applied with clarity and precision. For example, using logical operators such as && (AND), || (OR), and !

(NOT) with meaningful variable and function names simplifies the understanding of what the code is intended to do. Instead of a variable named 'data', which is ambiguous, 'customerData' or 'productList' immediately conveys the type of data handled.

One must also consider the complexity of real-world conditions in code logic. Take an HR/Payroll platform, where the policy to view salaries might include a hierarchy of permissions and exceptions. In such cases, avoiding deep nesting by breaking down complex conditions into smaller chunks of logic significantly enhances the code's readability and maintainability.

As Frontend Developers will attest, the importance of clean, understandable code cannot be overstated—especially when working remotely and navigating more meetings due to physical separation, making concise communication through code even more critical.

Moreover, embracing the Single Responsibility Principle (SRP) ensures that each module or function has one well-defined task, reducing code complexity and facilitating easier maintenance. For instance, a 'User' class should solely handle user information, with methods like 'getName' and 'getEmail' dedicated to fetching specific user attributes. Tools like ESLint further support clean coding by flagging potential issues, allowing developers to refine their code incrementally and ensuring that both current and future teammates can comprehend and work with the code more effectively.

Using Structs for Clarity in Function Arguments
In the dynamic world of JavaScript, defining clear structures for data passed to functions can be a game-changer for code maintainability and readability. Structs, akin to objects with predetermined properties, serve this purpose brilliantly. They establish explicit expectations for the types and properties a function requires, essentially serving as a blueprint for function arguments.

This practice not only clarifies the function's requirements but also minimizes errors by ensuring that the provided data aligns with what the function is designed to handle.

Take, for instance, the concept of array destructuring. It's a powerful feature in JavaScript that lets you assign elements from an array to distinct variables in a single, elegant statement. Imagine applying a similar level of clarity and structure when dealing with function arguments through the use of structs.

By defining the shape and type of data upfront, developers can write functions that are self-documenting and significantly easier to understand.

Considering the importance of data structures in computer science—which dictate how data is stored, accessed, and manipulated—employing structs in JavaScript can lead to more effective problem-solving. This approach aligns perfectly with the language's inherent flexibility, allowing variables to change types, but it provides a layer of organization that can enhance code quality significantly.

Moreover, the recent 10-year anniversary of TypeScript, a language built on JavaScript that adds static types, underscores the programming community's recognition of the value of clear typing. While JavaScript remains dynamically typed, the utilization of structs for function arguments brings a taste of the benefits of static typing to JavaScript developers, offering a means to manage complexity and maintain code quality without a full commitment to a statically typed environment.

Embracing this technique can be particularly valuable for complex applications where performance and efficiency are paramount. Just as a well-chosen data structure can optimize algorithm performance, well-defined structs can optimize code clarity and maintenance. With the right structures in place, JavaScript code becomes more predictable, robust, and easier to debug, making it a win for both the developer and the end user.

Ensuring Data Integrity Through Validation
Maintaining data integrity is paramount in JavaScript applications, especially as they grow in complexity and scale. To safeguard against data corruption and bolster application security, developers must employ rigorous validation protocols. Input validation is the first line of defense, ensuring that user-provided data conforms to expected formats and values.

Data type checking is equally important to prevent type-related errors that could lead to application crashes or unpredictable behavior. Additionally, data sanitization removes any malicious or extraneous input that could compromise the application.

Recent insights reveal a surge in JavaScript's popularity and its application in data-heavy projects. With 72% of developers expressing admiration for JavaScript frameworks like Svelte, it is clear that robust validation mechanisms are essential for the countless interactive and dynamic web applications being built.

To illustrate, automated testing, including unit testing and test-driven development (TDD), is instrumental in preempting potential issues. Automated testing allows for thorough examination without manual intervention, while unit testing pinpoints the smallest code units, ensuring they function as intended. TDD, where tests precede code creation, embeds quality checks from the outset of development.

Moreover, clean code practices cannot be overstated. As one developer states, understanding one's own or others' code is crucial, making clean code a necessity for collaborative and sustainable projects. This sentiment is echoed by others who recognize that clean code is repeatedly relevant and vital for front-end development.

Incorporating these strategies into JavaScript projects not only improves data integrity but also enhances the scalability and maintainability of the applications. As developers navigate through the evolving landscape of web development, adhering to these best practices ensures that applications remain reliable and performant, even as they scale to meet increasing user demands and data volumes.

Formatting Rules for Readable Code
In the realm of JavaScript, a language at the core of interactive web development, the clarity and structure of code cannot be overstated. Effective formatting is more than mere aesthetics; it's about crafting code that is understandable and navigable, not just for the individual developer but for the entire team involved in the project. This involves a set of best practices for formatting, such as consistent indentation, managing line length, spacing, and organizing code in a logical manner.

For a Frontend Developer, JavaScript is not just a tool but a vital part of their creative arsenal. As the web celebrates its 35th birthday, reflecting on its evolution highlights the importance of maintaining clean code, especially when considering the increasing complexity brought about by the rise of AI and the dominance of large corporations in the digital space. Clean code is synonymous with a codebase that is easy to read, review, and collaborate on, even when working remotely.

The experiences shared by seasoned developers emphasize that clean code and standardized formatting are recurring topics of discussion and are crucial for the longevity and success of software projects. The practice of writing clean code, which includes following established formatting rules, is a skill to be honed and valued. It's the key to making code accessible for code reviews, new projects, and team collaborations that are often challenged by physical separation and increased virtual meetings.

In summary, as we navigate the complexities of modern web development, adherence to JavaScript formatting standards is an indispensable component of clean code philosophy. It ensures that the code we write today remains maintainable and comprehensible for the developers of tomorrow.

Best Practices for Code Readability
Improving the readability of JavaScript is not just a matter of preference but a critical factor in the maintenance and understanding of code. Emphasizing meaningful naming for variables and functions is vital, as they are the building blocks of clear code. Clear and concise comments serve as guideposts for anyone who navigates the codebase, explaining the why behind the code, not just the how.

Additionally, steering clear of complex constructs not only makes your code more accessible but also minimizes the chances of bugs creeping in. This approach to writing JavaScript aligns with industry insights and front-end developers' experiences, underscoring the importance of clean, maintainable code in facilitating team collaboration, especially in remote work environments where clear communication is paramount. Furthermore, research suggests that developers should be mindful of code smells—indicators of deeper issues in code quality—as their identification and resolution can significantly improve the code's maintainability.

Following these best practices ensures that codebases are robust, scalable, and can withstand the test of time and team transitions.

Maintaining Code Quality and Security
For JavaScript projects, ensuring code quality and security is critical. Regular code reviews, automated testing, and adherence to security guidelines are fundamental practices that developers should implement. These steps enable the early detection and resolution of problems, enhancing the stability of the codebase and safeguarding it against vulnerabilities.

For instance, M&T Bank, with its substantial history, had to establish Clean Code standards to maintain software performance and compliance, which is vital in the digital transformation of the banking sector. Likewise, the increasing complexity of team coordination, especially in remote work scenarios, underscores the significance of clean code practices. It becomes evident through the experiences shared by industry professionals that clean code is not just a preference but a necessity for project success and understanding among developers.

Furthermore, with the rise of AI-generated code and the prevalent use of third-party components, the importance of a Software Bill of Materials (SBOM) and an understanding of open source components within your code has become crucial. Automated security testing, such as software composition analysis (SCA), is now essential to manage the sheer volume of components typical in modern applications. The latest OSSRA report highlights that 96% of commercial software contains open source, and the average application includes 526 open source components, demonstrating the scale at which these practices need to be deployed.

Involving Developers in Defining Standards
Creating and adhering to coding standards is a critical component of software development, especially when the integrity and security of the software are paramount. In industries like banking, the need for stringent coding practices is underscored by the high stakes of security and regulatory compliance. M&T Bank, with its significant history and digital transformation, understands this necessity and has taken proactive steps to establish Clean Code standards across its development teams.

To ensure these standards are not only set but also embraced by developers, it's paramount to involve them in the creation process. This fosters a sense of ownership and leads to standards that are both practical and effective, tailored to the specific needs of the team. Involving developers can take various forms, such as soliciting their input on best practices, conducting code reviews to monitor adherence, and providing training to enhance their understanding of why certain standards are in place.

For instance, within the corporate coding landscape, a consistent coding style and proper indentation are not just about aesthetics; they are about creating a collaborative environment where code is easily understood and maintained. The conventions established, such as module usage or import statements, are not arbitrary but are instead crucial for project efficiency and performance.

Code reviews are essential tools in maintaining these standards, but traditional methods like manual and peer reviews can be challenging. They demand significant time and effort, with the risk of human error due to fatigue. This is where automation tools and AI pair-programming aids, such as GitHub Copilot, come into play.

They not only enhance productivity across all developer levels but also help maintain a high standard of code quality by catching errors that might be missed during manual reviews.

The importance of meticulousness in coding practices is highlighted by seasoned developers who prioritize tasks like consistent indentation and variable casing. They understand that attention to detail in these areas can prevent larger issues down the line. Recognizing the right balance between clean code and other project demands is crucial, as clean code contributes to a codebase that is maintainable and efficient in the long term.

In summary, by integrating developers in the standard-setting process and leveraging tools that support code quality and compliance, organizations can achieve software that is not only functional but also secure and resilient against the challenges of modern software development.

Flowchart: Process of Establishing Clean Code Standards

Tools for Ensuring Adherence to Standards
When a development team expands beyond a few members, the diversity of coding styles can lead to extended and complex code reviews. Tools like ESLint and Prettier streamline the process by automating the enforcement of coding standards, saving time and preventing manual errors. ESLint, as a JavaScript linter, offers a wide array of configurable rules that help catch common code problems early, making it an essential part of the coding workflow.

Prettier acts as a code formatter to ensure a consistent style across the codebase. By establishing a .prettierrc file with formatting options, developers can integrate Prettier into their IDE to automatically format code upon saving.

Linting, the process of scanning code for errors using tools called linters, has been crucial in identifying issues such as missing semicolons or unused variables. The term "lint" originates from a Unix utility that examined C code, and today, this concept has been widely adopted across various programming languages, including JavaScript.

SonarLint, another tool in the developer's arsenal, operates in the background of your IDE, instantly analyzing code changes to identify mistakes. As part of the SonarQube ecosystem, it extends the linting process by providing immediate feedback within the code editor itself.

These tools not only uphold coding standards but also address common dilemmas within projects, such as non-compliance with conventions in merge requests and the oversight of such issues during code reviews. In the ever-evolving world of web development, ESLint and Prettier have become key in enhancing projects like TxtToHTML, transforming them into clear, error-free, and high-quality codebases.

Flowchart: Streamlining Code Reviews with ESLint and Prettier

Code Reviews and Refactoring Best Practices
Conducting code reviews is not just an exercise in improving the code itself; it's a vital practice that fosters learning and collaboration within development teams. By delving into the code with a specific purpose, whether it's to enhance code quality, pinpoint bugs, or uphold coding best practices, the review process becomes more than a mere formality—it becomes a strategic tool for team growth and software excellence.

Code reviews should be approached as a collective responsibility, with all team members participating to ensure a shared understanding and to reduce the potential for conflicts arising from differing coding styles or expectations.
A standardized coding convention, including naming, formatting, and commenting, is essential to streamline the review process and avoid confusion, making reviews more efficient and coherent.
Refactoring is an integral part of maintaining code health. It involves restructuring code internally without altering external behavior, aiming to improve understandability, maintainability, and performance.
Recent research highlights the significant impact of code reviews on software delivery performance, with findings suggesting that diligent review practices can accelerate delivery by up to 50%. Meanwhile, clear signs, such as code that is challenging to understand or maintain, indicate when it's time to refactor. Employing the right tools and techniques during refactoring ensures that code remains optimized and productive.

Ultimately, effective code reviews and refactoring are not just about the code—they are about the people who write it and the collective effort to continuously improve and learn from each other.

Flowchart: Code Review Process

Performance Optimization Techniques
The dynamism of JavaScript has transformed static web pages into vibrant, interactive experiences. However, the very features that make JavaScript powerful—its ability to dynamically update the Document Object Model (DOM) and create responsive user interfaces—can also lead to performance bottlenecks if not managed correctly.

Optimizing JavaScript code is not just about making it work; it's about making it work efficiently. A common industry adage underscores the importance of this process: 'Make it work, make it right, then make it fast.' This philosophy advocates for an incremental approach to development, emphasizing the need for functional code before refining it for performance.

One of the keys to enhancing JavaScript performance is minimizing network requests. Each request can add latency, so using techniques like bundling resources and compressing files can lead to faster load times. Moreover, optimizing loops and conditionals—by avoiding unnecessary computations and refining logic—can significantly increase the speed of JavaScript-heavy applications.

Developers are encouraged to profile their code, identifying slow functions, and to refactor them for efficiency.

To provide a real-world context, consider a case study where a web application's performance was improved by 300x without modifying the core logic, simply by optimizing existing JavaScript code. This kind of improvement is not just about speed; it's about delivering a seamless user experience that meets the evolving expectations of today's web users.

As we continue to push the boundaries of web development with JavaScript, staying informed about the latest practices and updates to the language is critical. By leveraging advanced techniques and keeping performance at the forefront, developers can craft applications that are not only impressive in functionality but also in speed and responsiveness.

Proportions of JavaScript Performance Optimization Techniques

Version Control and Collaboration
Understanding the intricacies of version control systems, especially Git, is a cornerstone of modern software development. Git's distributed nature sets it apart from its predecessors, allowing every developer's copy to function as a full-fledged repository. This flexibility means developers can work offline and synchronize later, an autonomy that's well-suited to today's demand for remote and flexible work environments.

When it comes to best practices, clarity is king. Clear, descriptive naming for branches, commits, and pull requests is not just a nicety—it's a necessity for a smooth workflow. This becomes increasingly important as software development teams grow and projects become more complex.

The history of Git dates back to 2005 when the Linux kernel needed a new VCS after parting ways with BitKeeper. Linus Torvalds designed Git with a focus on speed, data integrity, and support for distributed, non-linear workflows. These requirements reflected the challenges faced by the Linux kernel development community and continue to resonate with modern development needs.

As software development evolves, so does the use of version control systems. The rise of infrastructure as code, policy as code, and low-code environments increases the demand for robust version control. Git, in particular, has become integral to managing the ever-growing complexity of software, which can include numerous microservices and legacy code spanning decades.

Leveraging Git effectively is about more than just managing code—it's about managing complexity and facilitating the kind of collaboration that echoes the manufacturing model, where discovery, experimentation, and planning are crucial to innovation and delivering quality products.

Git Workflow Process

Real-World Examples and Case Studies
Harnessing the power of JavaScript for building dynamic web applications necessitates more than just writing code; it demands the crafting of clean, efficient, and maintainable scripts. By exploring the practical applications of coding standards through real-world examples, developers can glean invaluable insights. Let's delve into how certain JavaScript codebases have reaped the rewards of stringent coding standards, leading to enhanced code quality and more seamless maintenance.

For instance, consider the implementation of Automated Testing, Unit Testing, and Test Driven Development (TDD). These methodologies, when applied to JavaScript, have demonstrated significant improvements in code correctness and security. Automated Testing encompasses a broad range of tests executed without human intervention, including those for performance and security.

Unit Testing zeroes in on the smallest units of code, ensuring each part functions as intended. TDD, a more strategic approach, requires writing tests prior to the code itself, guiding the development process with a focus on passing these tests.

The creation of alovajs serves as a prime example of these principles in action. This JavaScript library was born out of a need for seamless data interaction, even during network disruptions. It was designed to be user-friendly, taking inspiration from the prevalent use Hook pattern, and supports multiple frameworks and environments, demonstrating how anticipating user needs can drive the development of robust, clean code.

Furthermore, the experiences of seasoned developers underscore the importance of writing clear, maintainable code. As one Frontend Developer with over five years of remote work experience points out, clean code is crucial for understanding both one's own work and that of others, especially when physical separation increases the reliance on meetings and communication.

To illustrate the practical applications of these concepts, ESLint, an open source JavaScript linting utility, can be employed to enforce code quality standards. By integrating ESLint into your project, you can ensure your code adheres to a defined set of rules, which in turn makes it more readable and maintainable for anyone who works on it. Following the Single Responsibility Principle (SRP) also simplifies code by assigning a single task to each module or function, as demonstrated by a User class solely tasked with managing user information.

Clean code is not merely a theoretical ideal; it's a practical necessity. It's been observed that complexity in codebases can lead to 'change amplification', where a simple change necessitates numerous modifications across a project. This can bog down development and inflate lead times.

By adhering to coding standards and best practices, developers can mitigate these issues, streamline their processes, and produce code that stands the test of time and team transitions.

Efficient and Results-Driven Flowchart: Harnessing the Power of JavaScript for Building Dynamic Web Applications

Conclusion
Adhering to coding standards in JavaScript enhances collaboration and efficiency. Clean, readable, and maintainable code allows for seamless navigation, reducing time spent deciphering different coding styles. It fosters an intuitive understanding of the codebase, enabling developers to focus on innovation.

In remote work environments, clear and consistent code is crucial for successful team interactions.

Using structs for function arguments improves code maintainability and readability. Structs establish clear expectations, minimizing errors and optimizing code clarity. Rigorous data validation safeguards against corruption and enhances application security.

Effective formatting, including consistent indentation and logical organization, contributes to code readability and collaboration. Meaningful naming, clear comments, and avoiding complex constructs enhance code accessibility.

Ensuring code quality and security requires regular code reviews, automated testing, and adherence to guidelines. Involving developers in defining coding standards fosters ownership and leads to effective practices. Automation tools like ESLint and Prettier streamline coding standards enforcement.

Optimizing JavaScript involves minimizing network requests, optimizing loops, and profiling code for performance improvements. Understanding Git and using clear naming conventions facilitates smooth workflows and collaboration.

By embracing coding standards and following best practices, developers empower themselves and their teams to build robust and accessible digital solutions. Consistent adherence to these standards ensures maximum efficiency and productivity, leading to successful software development outcomes.

Take your code to the next level with Kodezi. Sign up now and optimize your codebase for maximum efficiency and security!

Share
Tweet
Share
Share
Email

Copy
Read next
What Are Web IDEs with AI? Understanding Their Features and Benefits
News
·
Jan 20, 2025
What Are Web IDEs with AI? Understanding Their Features and Benefits
Explore how web IDE AI enhances coding efficiency and transforms development practices for programmers.

Kodezi Content Team
Best Practices for Using AI Chat for Code: Tips to Maximize Your Coding Efficiency
News
·
Jan 20, 2025
Best Practices for Using AI Chat for Code: Tips to Maximize Your Coding Efficiency
Unlock coding efficiency with best practices for leveraging AI chat for code.

Kodezi Content Team
Best Practices for DevOps Application Implementation: Proven Strategies for Success
News
·
Jan 20, 2025
Best Practices for DevOps Application Implementation: Proven Strategies for Success
Explore best practices and strategies for successful DevOps application implementation.

Kodezi Content Team
Kodezi Blog
Explore the latest insights and tips on coding, AI-powered tools, and developer productivity on the Kodezi blog.

Twitter
RSS
Kodezi Blog
Home
Documentation
Legal
©2025 Kodezi Blog. Published with Ghost & Flair.

Beta
0 / 10
used queries
1
Invensis
About Us
Clients
Quality and Compliance
Contact Us
Top 9 Best Practices for Improving Software Coding Standards in 2025
IT
Top 9 Best Practices for Improving Software Coding Standards in 2025
Ronald Davis
Ronald Davis
November 9, 2022
Last updated on:
December 17, 2024

|

Read time: 6 mins

Copy To Clipboard
Copy Link
Home > Blog > IT > Top 9 Best Practices for Improving Software Coding Standards in 2025
Follow us on:
Linked In
Twitter
Youtube
Facebook
Share it on
Linked In
Twitter
Facebook
Mail
Content
What are the Coding Standards?
Coding Standard Importance in Software Development
Benefits of Coding Standards to Improve Code Quality
Improves Efficiency
Reduces Project Failure
Eases Code Maintenance
Creates Clean and Cost-efficient Code
Best Practices to Improve Code Quality
1. Use Code Comments and Proper Documentation
2. Indent your Code
3. Avoid Over-commenting
4. Group your Code
5. Use a Consistent Naming Scheme
6. Avoid Duplication
7. Avoid Complicated Nesting Code
8. Shorten your Line Lengths
9. Organize your Files and Folders Systematically
Tools to Analyze Code Quality
Sonar Lint
Sonar Qube
Conclusion
The world is moving online. Naturally, creating websites to showcase their abilities is on the rise. If a website is designed well, it contributes to your reach and growth by many folds. On the contrary, bad site design with sub-standard code jeopardizes your online presence immensely. It lowers your SEO ranking, increases the loading time, frustrates your customers, and squashes potential opportunities. Hence, maintaining high code quality standards is a priority for all businesses that want to drive their business through the internet.‍

Here’s why code quality standards are critical: –

The loading time of five seconds engages the audience 70 percent longer than the loading time of nineteen seconds.
A 100-millisecond drop in the site speed drops conversion rates by 7 percent.
What are the Coding Standards?
It’s a sequence of processes for a particular coding language that requires a coding format, methods, and different procedures. Establishing a programming guideline gives a clear message to all developers to adopt one style of code. Such a consistent code brings uniformity and simplifies its usage and maintenance.

Maintaining consistency throughout your program improves your code level and page loading effectively. The guideline should be unambiguous and followed through to all stages of the code. In the end, your program feels like it’s consistent throughout and written by a single coder.

Coding Standard Importance in Software Development
In the absence of a standard coding procedure, coders utilize their styles to program the project. So, you get different functionalities that may not work well together. A lack of clear and consistent rules causes various security concerns and performance issues. Inconsistent code exposes your site to frequent cyberattacks and causes harm to your data. Since every developer uses a different standard, fixing and upgrading code becomes cumbersome and time-consuming.

Benefits of Coding Standards to Improve Code Quality
Improves Efficiency
Around 75 percent of your coder’s time is spent on debugging. Instead of increasing your development costs, execute coding guidelines to recognize problems earlier, and correct them in time. This measure is a great long-term strategy to increase efficiency, as well.

Reduces Project Failure
Did you know that 31.1 percent of software projects get canceled before they’re completed? Avoid coding failures by implementing code quality best practices to reduce the failure risk.

Eases Code Maintenance
Writing uniform code eases maintenance by reducing bug detection time. If you decide to switch your IT firm, your new coder can easily navigate through the program to find and rectify bugs.

Creates Clean and Cost-efficient Code
Pushing for code standards gives you clean and reusable code that drastically reduces your developmental costs and efforts. Reusing the same code saves you time and ensures you deliver before the deadline.

Best Practices to Improve Code Quality
Coding Guide Lines
Image 1 - Coding Guide Lines
Best Practices to Improve Code Quality[/caption]Most of your code quality issues arise during the software development process. Your developers can address and resolve a lot of these issues by imbibing code quality best practices. Here are some examples of the same.

1. Use Code Comments and Proper Documentation
Putting comments on your code assists other programmers to comprehend your work quickly. Using an Integrated Development Environment (IDE) and other tools, you can use commenting differently. Begin each function with a comment on its purpose, what parameters it uses and manipulates, and any exception it throws. Explaining the role of each class, file, and nested code helps them grasp the coding functionality completely.

2. Indent your Code
Indenting your code is highly advisable to increase code readability. There are no industry standards on indentation. You can make up your style and specify it in the guidelines to showcase code consistency.

3. Avoid Over-commenting
While commenting is a great coding practice, ensure you don’t over-comment and explain obvious functionalities. This malpractice makes your code look clumsy, unattractive, and unprofessional.

4. Group your Code
Grouping your code using methods and separating them with proper spaces improves code readability. Additionally, putting a short and informative comment at the start of each block reduces over-commenting.

5. Use a Consistent Naming Scheme
Consider using a common naming scheme for all your functions, methods, classes, and files. By following this guideline, you distinguish among them and foster greater understanding. The two industry-standard naming conventions are:-

CamelCase
In this guideline, each word’s first letter (except the first one) is in the capital. For example, get Parameters() uses this rule.

Underscore
This convention uses an underscore to separate words. For example, get parameters() follows the underscore rule.

6. Avoid Duplication
Developers should adhere to the DRY (Don’t Repeat Yourself) guideline while programming. Ensure you write your program and avoid copying the code recklessly. Coders should keep the program crisp, pointed, and original to improve its quality.

7. Avoid Complicated Nesting Code
Simplify your code significantly by avoiding code nesting as much as you can. Avoiding deep nesting improves code comprehension and reduces bug correction time.

8. Shorten your Line Lengths
Use narrow columns and short lines to ease readability across your project. Try to ensure each code line doesn’t exceed 80 characters.

9. Organize your Files and Folders Systematically
You could write all your code in one file. However, we don’t recommend it for readability and maintenance issues. Instead, try a modular approach to coding by creating different files and organizing them well.

Tools to Analyze Code Quality
Technology plays a huge role in the maintenance of code quality standards. Many tools help you maintain high code standards, and great style, and suggest various refactoring methods. Here are some tools that’ll contribute to code quality improvement: –

Sonar Lint
This app detects bugs, provides instant advice, and exposes old issues.

Sonar Qube
This tool inspects continuously, recognizes severe issues, centralizes quality, and integrates DevOps.

‍

Conclusion
Software development is an integral part of your business strategy. By improving site performance, you engage leads, maintain customer relations, and improve your SEO ranking significantly. Adopt efficient code quality practices today!

Ronald Davis
Ronald Davis

Ronald is a seasoned professional in the IT industry, bringing extensive knowledge and expertise to his writing. His expertise comes from closely working with huge corporations and organizations of different scales helping them meet their IT requirements on time. Ronald excels in technology integration, cybersecurity, and system optimization. As a prominent writer in the IT space, Ronald delivers concise and practical advice, empowering businesses to leverage technology for success.

Search an Article
Search
Discover Our Full Range of Services
Click Here
Explore the Industries We Serve
Click Here
Blog Category

Finance & Accounting
Back Office
Call Center
eCommerce
Revenue Cycle Management
Order Management
Customs Brokerage
Factoring Support
Insurance
Mortgage Processing
Logistics
Health Care
IT
Top Articles
Types of Inventory Risks and Their Impacts on Businesses
Invoice Fraud Detection: What It is and How to Prevent It?
How to Improve Accounts Payable Process in 2025: Top 12 Tips
Impact of Blockchain on Medical Billing: 7 Key Impacts
Related Articles

eCommerce
How to Upload Products in BigCommerce? A Detailed Guide
Adding products to your store is easy with our guide on how to upload products in BigCommerce. Follow these steps for a seamless upload experience.

January 3, 2025

|

Read time: 6 mins


Finance & Accounting
Restaurant Accounting: Methods, Step-by-Step Process and Benefits
Managing accounting in restaurants involves meticulous tracking of expenses, revenue, and inventory to ensure financial health and operational efficiency. Read our detailed guide now!

January 3, 2025

|

Read time: 7 mins


Order Management
Types of Inventory Risks and Their Impacts on Businesses
Inventory risks can cause inventory management to go sideways. Learn about the different types of inventory risks, their impacts and how to deal with them effectively.

January 13, 2025

|

Read time: 6 mins

Services We Provide
Finance and Accounting Services
Revenue Cycle Management Services
Order Management Services
eCommerce Support Services
Back Office Services
Call Center Services
Factoring Support Services
Mortgage Processing Services
Insurance Claim Services
IT Services
Analytics Services
Digital Marketing Services
Corporate Training Services
Industries We Serve
Logistics BPO Support Services
Customs Brokerage BPO Services
Healthcare BPO Services
Insurance BPO Services
Chemical & Manufacturing BPO Services
Real Estate BPO Services
BPO Services for Retail Industry
Telecom BPO Services
Media Entertainment BPO Services
Automotive BPO Services
BPO for Education
Energy and Utilities Industry BPO Services
IT Related Services
Ruby on Rails Development Services
Python Development Services
PHP Development Services
.NET Development Outsourcing Services
Java Development Services
iOS Application Development Services
HTML5 Application Development Outsourcing Services
Android Application Development Services
Social Media Application Testing Services
Web Application Testing Services
Desktop Application Testing Services
Mobile Application Testing Services
Component Unit Testing Services
Stress Testing Services
Load Testing Services
Regression Testing Services
System Testing Services
Functional Testing Services
Database Testing Outsourcing Services
Application Testing Services
Agile Testing Outsourcing Services
Grey Box and White Box Testing Services
Usability Testing Services
Compatibility Testing Services
Performance Testing Services
Black Box Testing Outsourcing Services
Security Testing Services
Software Automation Testing Services
Manual Software Testing Services
Software Testing Services
Mobile Application Development Services
Web Development Services
Software Development Services
Invensis



Quick Links
About Us
Careers
Services
Industries
Contact Us
Resource Library
Case Studies
Brochures
News
Videos
Blog
Resources
White Papers
Site Tools
Terms & Conditions
Privacy Policy
Trademark Policy
Site Map
Quality and Compliance
ISO 9001:2015 Certified
ISO 27001:2022 Certified
Achieved HIPAA Compliance
Key Services
Back Office
Data Entry Services
Invoice Data Entry Services
Ecommerce Support
Product Data Entry Services
Call Center
Email Support Services
Inbound Call Center Services
Live Chat Services
Technical and Help Desk Support Services
Phone Answering Services
Accounting
Accounts Payable Services
Outsourced Bookkeeping Services
Accounts Receivable Services
Payroll Processing Services
Mortgage Processing
Revenue Cycle Management
Medical Coding Services
Medical Billing Services
Gastroenterology Services
Order Management
Health Care BPO
@2000-2025 Invensis Technologies Pvt Ltd

Terms Of Use
Trademark Policy
Privacy Policy

Beta
0 / 10
used queries
1
Skip menu
Netguru logo
Open the Services submenu
Services






Open the Industries submenu
Industries




Open the Clients submenu
Clients




Open the About us submenu
About us



Open the Insights submenu
Insights




Estimate project

11 Software Development Best Practices in 2024
Photo of Weronika Włodarczyk
Weronika Włodarczyk

Updated Nov 16, 2024 • 12 min read
software_development_practices
In this blog post

1. DRY principle
2. YAGNI principle
3. Testing best practices
and 9 more
Best practices are guidelines, ethics development standards, or ideas that represent the most efficient course of action in a given business situation.

When we design and build a software product, there's a handful of software development standards and best practices to be aware of, from the YAGNI principle to paying attention to style guides.

Short summary:
Following software development best practices leads to improved code quality, efficiency, and easier maintenance.
Principles such as DRY and YAGNI provide guidance foreffective coding and feature development.
Robust software is achieved through thorough testing, version control, and diligent code reviews.
Following best practices is a way to improve the performance and productivity of an organization, and something we take seriously here at Netguru. When it comes to software development best practices, what should software developers consider?

From the DRY – don't repeat yourself – principle for software bugs and implementing version controls to enforcing naming conventions and designing before coding, there's no shortage of guidelines to follow. By adhering to software engineering best practices, we ensure the software and applications we create for our clients and their end users are well-designed and coded, as well as robust and thoroughly tested.

Identifying and sharing best software development practices nurtures a learning culture and fills knowledge gaps. Keeping best practices in mind also enhances efficiency, enables better decision-making, and provides employees with an internal knowledge base. Finally, costs fall and we save time, because all team members are on the same page across the software development lifecycle.

Below, we’ve created a handy listicle, outlining 10 top software development best practices we stand by, plus a range of examples.

1. DRY principle
This stands for “Don’t repeat yourself” and was formulated in 1999 by Andy Hunt and Dave Thomas. According to this principle: “Every piece of knowledge must have a single, unambiguous, authoritative representation within a system.” Fast forward to 2023, and it can still be applied to any piece of code you design.

You should always avoid knowledge duplication, meaning business logic that has a certain functionality should only appear once in your application. However, code duplication is totally acceptable – you don’t have to worry about making every single line of code unique.

For example, let’s say you have a calculation for the net price of service (applies to your suppliers) and one for the product (that customers can buy). Even though these price calculating functions may look the same, there’s no knowledge duplication, because they refer to different business applications.

If duplication of knowledge does take place, that can lead to mistakes later down the line. Why? Having to change your code in multiple places is more time-consuming and risky than working on one cohesive unit, because you may forget about all the places you need to apply changes.

2. YAGNI principle
This stands for “You Ain't Gonna Need It”: Don't write code you don't need right now, but may come in handy in the future. That future may never come, meaning you'll end up wasting time for nothing. Or, requirements for developing software may change and you'll end up needing to refactor your code. Not only will you waste your time, but other software engineers' too, since they'll be trying to work with unusable code.

If your development team’s working on a big feature, organize a planning session and split it up into smaller tasks, so that each piece of code is independent. The last thing you want is to release half-finished code that needs to be completed later on.

3. Testing best practices
Writing unit tests is one the easiest things you can do to improve code quality. Creating a working code isn’t enough: It should be tested thoroughly to ensure it always gives the desired output. Unit tests tackle small, modular pieces of code and are designed to test one functionality at a time.

When carrying out unit tests, consider different scenarios and don’t just focus on aspects where everything already works as it’s supposed to. Make your test cases fail, see what happens, and then decide if that’s what you expect/want.

For example, if your software architecture expects a user to give a numerical input, what happens if they enter a letter instead? Does the application break, throw an error, or accept the faulty input?

With that in mind, write a unit test for a fail and a success scenario. You should also aim for 100% coverage of your tests, meaning all your code should be tested.

There are libraries designed to calculate test coverage for you:

Istanbul for Node.js
Coverage for Python
Serenity or JCov for Java
4. Version control
This is the practice of tracking and managing changes to software code – crucial if multiple developers are working on the same software project. New features or bug fixes can be worked on at the same time, and there’s no risk of developers overriding someone else's code. Version control tools also allow you to revert to previous versions if mistakes are made during important software development, without disrupting the work of team members.

The most popular version control systems are Git and GitHub, the web-based hosting service for Git. GitHub provides pull requests to improve version control even further – you can easily squash redundant and unclear commits, so your Git is kept clean and easily readable. Additional version control tools include CVS, SVN, and Mercurial.

5. Embrace AI Assistance
Leveraging AI tools can significantly streamline software development processes. GitHub Copilot, a prime example, is an AI-driven code completion tool developed by GitHub and OpenAI. It assists developers by providing real-time code suggestions, thereby enhancing productivity.

At Netguru, nearly 100 engineers utilize GitHub Copilotdaily, cutting down development time dramatically. For instance, Copilot can generate entire lines or blocks of code, including functions and algorithms, saving time and reducing manual effort.

Moreover, it supports multiple programming languages and integrates seamlessly with popular IDEs like Visual Studio Code.

This tool not only helps in writing efficient code but also aids in learning new languages and discovering alternative coding techniques. Embracing such AI assistance enables developers to focus more on problem-solving and design, ultimately improving code quality and efficiency.


Alok Ranjan, Software Engineering Manager at Dropbox

6. Pay attention to style guides
Every computer programming language has style guides, created to make code more readable and pleasurable to work with. Using a style guide doesn’t usually affect the way the code works, so if you ignore it, your program may be fine. However, working with code that doesn’t follow best practices is generally tedious and slow.

It’s a good idea is to use a linter tool that works as a static code analyzer and uses style guides to improve code quality. Linter tools show you where your code style can be improved, and some fix minor issues for you, by changing your code while it runs.

There are multiple linter tools available for each language; the main differences are around additional features, flexibility, and the way they present data.

Examples of linter tools include:

ESLint for JavaScript
RuboCop for Ruby
plus Flake8
Pylint for Python
7. Naming conventions
There are best practices for naming variables, types, functions, and other entities in your source code and documentation that should never be ignored. It may be tempting to use letters, abbreviations, funny names, or skipping underscores, but that costs you more time and effort in writing code in the long run.

Correct naming provides meaningful information about your variable or function, allowing you to refactor easily and enhance code readability. If someone else looks at your code, they should know the purpose of a function just by reading its name – there shouldn’t be any guesswork involved. If your software project is big, it may take a long time to find a misnamed piece of existing code – an unnecessary waste of manpower.

Here’s an example:

def c(a, b):
	return a * b 
def count_weekly_pay(hours_worked, hourly_pay_rate):
	return hours_worked * hourly_pay_rate
Both functions do exactly the same thing, but when you look at the code that uses naming conventions (2.), you instantly know its purpose and it’s easy to find by the name.

8. Design before coding
Planning is just as important as coding, and it has a huge impact on code quality. Features should be designed and researched before anyone even thinks about building them, and it should be a team effort.

There are endless software design characteristics, design patterns and tools you can implement, so discussing different options will give your team the best shot at creating an effective plan. Coding before you design usually results in tons of wasted time. Indeed, you may develop software that ends up not being the best solution, meaning work needs to be redone.

9. Don’t push too many features
It’s tempting to regularly roll out new features users will love, but that may actually make your app worse! Instead, concentrate on balancing new features with refactoring. Refactoring code is a crucial part of the software development process.

As your software grows bigger and bigger, models may change, libraries may become outdated, and code structure may evolve. If you ignore these potential issues, they end up as technical debt that grows bigger with each non-refactored version.

Actions like reducing duplicated code, simplifying complex functions, and extracting common variables and functions don't add direct business value, but they do allow software development processes to go smoothly.

10. Maintain staging and production environments
A staging environment is supposed to be as close to your production code as possible, so you can test features before making them available to users. This is an additional step in the software development lifecycle, and it makes releasing new features a longer process. With that in mind, why is it a good idea?

Staging is a place where you catch bugs or issues, before they get to the production environment and do true damage to your app. Unit tests alone aren’t enough to catch potential problems, because you can’t test integrations.

If you don’t work with a staging environment, you may release a new version of your application that doesn’t work properly. That results in a negative user experience, the need to roll back your release, potential data loss, and time and money wasted on immediate hot fixes.

11. Carry out code reviews
Code review is a process where a software developer’s code (or a pull request) is examined by another software developer. It improves the quality of the overall code, helps identify bugs, and reduces the amount of work required to optimize code later.

Analyzing a pull request or a piece of code takes time (the amount depends on the size of the feature), but that’s the only downside. It’s definitely worth it though, because this task can’t be performed by a tool or program.

Developers should check:

Design
Naming conventions
Styling
Test coverage and application
Fulfilled requirements
Optimization
Following software development best practices
When followed, software development best practices help produce good outcomes for both the software quality project in question and the business as a whole. They represent an optimal way to work, ensuring clients get the most out of the software we build for them.

Here at Netguru, we’re all about adhering to agreed-upon standards and guidelines, whether it’s maintaining staging and production environments, carrying out code reviews, or running unit tests. If you like the sound of the way we work, take a look at our software development services offering.

Software Development
Engineering
Photo of Weronika Włodarczyk
More posts by this author

Weronika Włodarczyk

Python Developer at Netguru
Custom software solutions
Design, build, and scale your business
Discover how!
Read more on our Blog
Check out the knowledge base collected and distilled by experienced professionals.
2-3
Top Strategies for Successful SaaS Implementation
laptop credit card
Top Software Pricing Models: Effective Strategies for SaaS Success
Flutter or React Native
Flutter vs. React Native: Which Framework to Choose for Your Next Mobile App Development?
Generative AI
A Guide to AI Integration: How to Implement AI Assistants in Your Business

Mastering MVP UX Design: 5 Tips for Success
Data Validation with Pydantic 1200x630
Data Validation with Pydantic
We're Netguru
At Netguru we specialize in designing, building, shipping and scaling beautiful, usable products with blazing-fast efficiency.

Let's talk business

keller-williams
babbel
merck
ikea
volkswagen
ubs
We're Netguru
Netguru logo
Netguru S.A
Nowe Garbary Office Center
ul. Małe Garbary 9
61-756 Poznań, Poland
VAT-ID: PL7781454968
REGON: 300826280
KRS: 0000745671


hello@netguru.com

Follow Us
Digital Acceleration Editorial
Boost innovation with insights for change
Work email*
Netguru is committed to processing the above information in order to subscribe you to the newsletter. Other information is used for statistical purposes and, from time to time, we would like to contact you about our products and services, as well as other content that may be of interest to you. If you consent to contact you for these purposes, please tick the checkbox.

I agree to receive marketing communication from Netguru.
You can unsubscribe from these communications at any time. For more information on how to unsubscribe, our privacy practices please view our Privacy Policy.


Click for the details
Certificates:
b-corp
tuv-nord
Partnerships:
microsoft
aws
mendix
google-cloud-partner
webflow-premium-partner
Recognized by:
clutch
awwwards
inc-5000
ey-entrepreneur-of-the-year
forbes
Privacy Policy
Terms of use
Sitemap
©2025 Netguru S.A. All rights reserved.


Beta
0 / 10
used queries
1
Skip to content
EmailEmail Us
Mobile+1 (727) 291-0611
ChatChat Now
Login
CodeSigningStore Logo
Shop Certificates
Cloud Signing
Support
Blog
cart
MoneybackPrice Match Guarntee
The Ultimate Programming Best Practices Guide
Home » The Ultimate Programming Best Practices Guide
1 Star2 Stars3 Stars4 Stars5 Stars(
2
votes, average:
5.00
out of 5)
“Person[] software_Developers_who_FollowProgrammingBestPractices;” What’s wrong with this variable name? Find it out in our ultimate programming best practices guide. Discover how to get a better developer experience, write clear software, and ace your coding skills. Awaken the geek in you now
Did you know that the number one software security vulnerability listed in the Common Weakness Enumeration’s (CWE) Top 25 Most Dangerous Software Weaknesses is caused by programming mistakes like buffer overflows?

Everyone can make mistakes. But, when you hire constructors to build your new home, you expect them to ensure that the house is safe when you move in. In the same way, coders are expected to make sure they aren’t leaving any vulnerabilities open for hackers to exploit. Because as the Latins said:

“Errare humanum est, perseverare autem diabolicum” (To err is human, but to persist is diabolical).

In our previous article, you discovered seven essential coding languages to know for your cyber security coding career. Now, we’ll take you a step further and show you actionable programming best practices you can’t do without. With time and practice, this will help you become a first-class programmer. Learn how to avoid costly mistakes and improve your coding skills, no matter what programming language you use. It’s time to get serious and level up your coding game!

7 Programming Best Practices You Need to Know
Throughout my career, I’ve met people coding in very different ways. Even in my team, each developer had their unique way of programming. And rightly so — software development has its creative side, too. However, even if there are different ways to write code, the best practices that’ll help you become a better programmer remain the same.

Too busy coding to read an entire article? Take a quick coffee break and learn about the ultimate programming best practices with our summary table below.

Programming Best Practice	Examples
1. Follow a Coding Standard	
Computer emergency response team (CERT) standards. Available for several programming languages like Perl, C, C++, or Java.
Motor Industry Software Reliability Association (MISRA). The preferred coding standards for products related to the automotive industry.
2. Write Clear Code	
Effective naming
Clear structure and alignment.
Stay DRY: Don’t Repeat Yourself.
Add comments and documentation.
Organize your files and folders.
3. Ensure Your Code Is Easy to Maintain	
Standardize your headers.
Reuse your code, don’t duplicate it.
Avoid Hard-Coded Numerical Values.
4. Check Your Code (Before Code Review)	
Raxis.
Sonarqube.
PVS-Studio.
Klockwork.
5. Secure Your Code	
Run pen-tests.
Add input validation to your code.
Allow only encrypted connections to your database.
Be careful with authentication information (e.g., login credentials).
6. Use the Right Tools	
Code and artifact repositories.
CI/CD pipeline engines.
Containers.
Integrated development environments (IDEs).
7. Refactoring	
Tools like various IDEs.
Methods like refactoring in test-driven development, extractions, and renaming variables.
1. Follow a Coding Standard
Do you want to create clean, readable, and efficient code? Follow the coding standard related to the language you’re using and the software you’re writing. Why? Because the right collection of rules and techniques will enable you to write code that:

Matches product and users’ expectations, and
Meets business requirements.
Coding standards vary from industry to industry, and they’re very specific. If you’re writing software for a smartphone app, you’ll follow a different standard than if you were writing software for a Tesla car.

Usually concocted by software development and security communities, these standards are periodically updated and published on the internet. The most popular are those promoted by:

Computer emergency response team (CERT). Are you programming software in Perl, C, C++, or Java? Check their coding standards on CERT’s website. They’re free to download and you can give your contributions by adding your comment and recommendations.
Motor Industry Software Reliability Association (MISRA). The name says it all. It publishes the preferred coding standards for products related to the automotive industry, focusing on safety-critical industries in general. Only downside? Its publications aren’t available for free.
2. Write Clear Code
Developers come and go, and if they didn’t write clear code, it results in a wave of confusion when they leave. The last time it happened in my team, we learned the hard way how important it is to write code that’s clear and readable for everyone — not only computers.

The guy left and, a few days later, a key software program he wrote stopped working. The other developers in the team wanted to fix it but it took them ages to figure because of how it was written. The software’s security team had to do without it for weeks until the situation was rectified. In the end, it was clear that the best solution was to completely rewrite the software (and so they did). This time, the programmers and developers applied the following programming best practices to ensure the code was readable for all and easy to fix in the future.

Use Effective Naming
If you ever had a toddler asking for something, you know how difficult it can be to decrypt their request because they have their individual way of doing so. (For example, a term like “binky” may mean blanket or pacifier to them.) Programming is the same thing: call things by their name and everyone will understand you; get it wrong (i.e., use non-standardized terms) and they won’t have a clue what your code is about. Let’s have a look at an example:

private String dn;

Do you know what “dn” stands for? Of course not, you could only guess, but it could be anything. What if I write it like this?

private String developerName;

This looks much better, right? A good naming should also be effective, though. Do you remember the variable example at the beginning of this article?

Person[] software_developers_who_FollowProgrammingBestPractices;

Did you figure out what’s wrong with this variable? It’s too long and the naming is inconsistent. Do you want a better version?

Person[] DevelopersFollowingProgrammingBestPractices;

Can you still understand the meaning of the variable? I think so. This means that it’s clear enough but more concise. Did you notice that I capitalized the first letter of each word? This is a way to keep a consistent naming scheme. I could have also used underscores between words, which is the preferred method of PHP scripts like I did in the next example.

Last but not least, what if you’re writing SQL queries and keywords? Don’t forget to capitalize special words.

Create Clear Code Structure and Alignment
Don’t you hate when you have to scroll right to read a sentence? I find it extremely annoying and difficult to follow. It gets even worse when the structure isn’t clear enough in coding. To avoid all this, be sure to:

Limit your line length. Don have more than 80 columns.
Use the space key when you have to indent. This will make exactly four spaces like used in most languages, while the tab key won’t.
Limit your use of nesting. Nesting refers to code that performs a specific function contained within another code with a broader function and how that code is formatted. A good nesting limit is no more than four levels.
Let’s see an example of a badly structured code. The following example screenshot is code that allows you to check and report the working status of a/b/c/d. If they’re working, it’ll display the message “Working!” Otherwise, every time that one of them isn’t working properly, it’ll display the message “a/b/c or d broken.”

The code below has four levels of nesting (indicated by each “true”). It basically asks if conditions are true before getting to the code to run. It’s still readable because it has ‘only’ four conditions, but can you imagine with 10? It’d be a mess and would leave most people scratching their heads.

example of badly structured code
This is an example of badly structured code
If you remove the nesting, though, and put near each condition the exit instructions, the code structure becomes much clearer:

what the improved code looks like
This is what the improved code looks like. No more nesting!
Isn’t the second example much easier to read and understand?

Stay DRY: Don’t Repeat Yourself
Do you remember when you were a kid and your parents were repeating the same things to you over and over again? We all had it and we all hated it. The same happens with coding. Headers and footers are typical examples. Isn’t it better to create a separate file to reference wherever needed instead of repeating the same header and footer on each code page? Here’s how you can do that:

$this->load->view(‘includes/header’);

$this->load->view($main_content);

$this->load->view(‘includes/footer’);

Looking for more examples? Check another DRY scenario with JAVA codes.

Add Comments and Documentation
Let’s go back to my story about the developer who left the team. Well, unfortunately, the guy didn’t only write unreadable code; he also didn’t write any documentation about it, either, for us to reference. And this just made things worse for us because we were left scrambling to figure everything out when his application broke.

Want to be better than him and leave your team in a good position? Make sure you:

Write proper documentation. I know that it can be a boring task sometimes. However, having useful document can make a huge difference both for you and your team. Many of the teams I worked with used Confluence, others GitHub wiki as repositories. Regardless of which one you choose, just be sure to create these necessary resources.
Add comments only when necessary. Comments should be used to explain why you did something, not to explain your code. If your code isn’t clear enough, rewrite it, but don’t add redundant comments. Let’s consider the following example: ‘int pf;’ Do you want to clarify its meaning?
Don’t write a comment: int pf; //printfrequency
Improve your coding instead: int printfrequency;

Be specific. Make a habit of describing the issue. For example, if you want to assign a specific task to a colleague, you should clearly explain the action required and the owner of the task. Would you know what to do if you’d find this comment?
//TODO: make it work.

I don’t think so. In the above directions, you don’t know who is being directed to do something, or what the something is that needs to be done. What if I change the comment like this?

//TODO: (@John) implement xyz for stability.

Now, John knows exactly what he has to do and that he’s responsible for handling it.

Do you want to know more about what we discussed till now? Check the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) Communication Lab’s best practices for coding and comment style.

Organize Your Files and Folders
Think about your last coding project: would you be able to find a specific file quickly if asked? Would I be able to find it as well if I’d have to work on the same project and you weren’t available to ask? If the answer is no, then you should organize your files and folders more consistently. The following tips may help you:

Create a unique main folder for each project. It doesn’t matter if it’s a big or small project. The main folder should always be only one.
Include a README file. This is the first thing I look for when working on a project. Why? Because it contains all the information needed for a quick start: what the project is about, the way files are organized, and where further information can be found.
Keep your files small. The bigger the files, the more complicated they’ll be to read and maintain. Make sure that each file is dedicated to just one function or one feature.
Name your files properly. Before you pick a name for a file, ask yourself whether anyone would know what’s included in the file just by reading its name? If the answer is yes, then you’re good to go.
Bad File Name Examples	Good File Name Examples
button1.png	submit_button.png
very_final_version	version_4
Don’t forget to create a changelog file and copy licenses. The first one will include information about changes made on every version or revision. The second one will contain the license covering the software and any third-party licenses.
Use the right file structure. Depending on the size of the project, you may want to opt for a simple or more complex hierarchy like the examples available on GitHub.
Check the MIT Communication Lab’s File Structure page for more recommendations and tips.

3. Ensure Your Code Is Easy to Maintain
When I visited Easter Island, I was fascinated by those big heads carved in stone (Moai) by the Rapa Nui people. Sculpted hundreds of years ago, they’re still standing there, nearly unchanged. Codes aren’t like this. They aren’t set in stone. You constantly have to update, fix, and extend them. This is the reason why it’s so important that they’re written in a way that makes them easy to maintain. How can you do that?

Standardize Your Headers
Even when you have different modules, ensure you always follow the same header format for each one. For example, a header should include the following information:

Module name
Creation date
Author of the module
Modification history
Module summary
List of the functions supported in the module
List of the variables accessed or modified by the module
Reuse Your Code, Don’t Duplicate It
Duplicating code, while easy, creates a slew of issues. If you make changes to your cloned code but those modifications don’t propagate to all of your duplicated instances, it’ll result in corrupt code and errors. Making changes to a code with a lot of duplicated code is looking for trouble. What if (like it usually happens) the change doesn’t propagate to all duplicated instances? Your code will be corrupted. Isn’t it better to create reusable code by developing functions performing each unique task?

Avoid Hard-Coded Numerical Values
Check the code below. It’s a bit of a small truck dispatch program. Can you figure out what the 150 number means?

hard-coded numerical value
an example of a code including a hard-coded numerical value (magic number)
The number of boxes delivered? Nope. The number of boxes ready for shipment? No. What if I write it like this instead?

well explained numerical value
an example of a well explained numerical value
Now, can you guess what the 150 number refers to? In this case, it refers to the number of boxes that each truck can contain. That was much more straightforward, right?

Now, take the same examples and imagine that you have to have to change the number 150 to 250. In the second example, you’ll just have to update the value in one place, while in the first example, you’ll have to go through the whole code and update the magic number one by one.

4. Check Your Code (Before Code Review)
As we said at the beginning, everybody makes mistakes. Nobody is perfect, not even the best programmer. This is why it’s essential to constantly check and test your code even before a proper code review takes place. Adding a static code analysis tool to your continuous integration development process, where every change is integrated, tested, and verified, can be great. It’ll enable you to get almost real-time feedback on every piece of modified code and the affected execution paths without executing it.

Wanna try it for yourself? Pick one or more static code analysis tools among the ones listed below.

Raxis
The tool won’t only check that your program is working as designed, it’ll also run penetration tests to find security vulnerabilities. (We’ll talk more about securing your code in a bit.)

Sonarqube
This tool offers thousands of static code analysis rules covering 29 programming languages. It also has a free version.

PVS-Studio
Available for C, C++, C#, and Java, this tool is also compatible with Windows, Linux, and macOS. It matches warnings to MITRE’s Common Weakness Enumeration (CWE), SEI CERT Coding Standards, and supports the MISRA standard for automobiles.

Klockwork
This tool analyzes codes written in C, C++, C#, Java, JavaScript, Python, and Kotlin. Built with a focus on the devsecops process, security is integrated at the heart of the development process.

5. Secure Your Code
Insecure coding often results in vulnerable applications. Relying on unsafe applications puts your customers as well as your organization’s brand and reputation at risk. This is especially bad news when you take into account that 85% of organizations interviewed by Imperva were victims of a successful cyberattack in 2021. It’s even worse when you consider that 75% of customers will stop doing businesses with organizations that have data breaches.

Following programming best practices for writing secure codes can greatly minimize those risks. Here are a few examples.

Run Pen-Tests
Take your white hat out of the closet and start breaking into your code to early identify weaknesses, errors, and vulnerabilities. Use:

Exploit kits. With pen-testing frameworks like Rapid7 Metasploit, you’ll be always a step ahead of the game.
Fuzz testing. Automated tools to find out the reaction of your application to certain behaviors (including malicious ones). BeSTORM, Code Intelligence, or Mayhem for Code are just a few examples of the numerous fuzz testing tools available on the market.
Scanners. Scan every corner of your codes and applications to prevent attacks like SQL injections (i.e., a malicious code that could interfere with the queries that an application makes to its database.), XSS (i.e., cross scripting, or malicious code inserted in your web application), and more. Try Invicti scan, Acutenix scanner, or the open-source Zed Attack Proxy (ZAP).
Want your pen test to be more effective? Put security first in your development lifecycle by implementing secdevops.

Add Input Validation to Your Code
If your code allows user input, do you really want to allow users to enter any type of input without restrictions? Let me give you a practical example. I use WordPress. Do you know what one of the first things I did at the time I set up my website? Ensure that every comment was set for review before it would be published. I didn’t like the idea of my readers viewing spam, phishing, or dodgy links in the comments. The same goes for programming.

Writing a code without including any form of input validation is like leaving the door open to attackers.

javascript form validation
an example of a JavaScript form validation
In the example above, we’re ensuring that if the form field fname is left empty, this function shows an alert message (e.g., “Name must be filled out”), and returns false (meaning that the submission won’t go through).

Allow Only Encrypted Connections to Your Database
The majority of databases allow unencrypted connections by default. However, some others (e.g., Microsoft SLQ server) encrypt only the initial authentication process. What does it have to do with your code? Well, if you’re programming an application that requires users to enter their usernames and passwords to access it, that sensitive information will be transmitted in plain text (i.e., it’s susceptible to man-in-the-middle attacks). Don’t let the hackers celebrate — ensure your database traffic is always encrypted.

Change the configuration to only allow secure, encrypted connections.
Install a trusted  secure socket layer/transport layer security (SSL/TLS) certificate on your web server.
Configure your application to validate the digital certificate to establish a secure connection.
Be Careful With Authentication Information
Usernames, passwords, and authentication errors are all very sensitive and precious information that could resonate all over the press if they end up in an attacker’s hands. Look what happened recently to GitHub — 100,000 users were impacted when stolen OAuth tokens were used.

Never store passwords in plain text. Salt them (e.g., add a random string to the hashed password) and hash them using a strong hashing algorithm before storing only the salted password hash. (Never store the passwords themselves.)
Remove sensitive data before publishing your project. Did you just publish your project on GitHub and suddenly realize that you forgot to remove some credentials and tokens from it? You’re not alone. Make sure you know how to remove them and how to avoid accidental commits in the future.
Be somewhat vague with your error information. When you write how your code should handle authentication errors, make sure you don’t give out too much information. Why? A malicious third party may read it and use the information at their advantage. Take the examples of bad authentication errors below: the attacker would know that the user ID he entered is incorrect or that the user doesn’t exist. It’s like a poker game: never give out too much information if you want to have a chance to win.
Bad Authentication Error Examples	Good Authentication Error Examples
Login failed, incorrect user ID	Login failed, invalid user ID or password
Login failed, the user doesn’t exist	Login failed, invalid user name or password
Find more information and examples about authentication error handling on OWASP’s authentication cheat sheet.

6. Use the Right Tools
Would you clean your chimney with a toothbrush? You could, but it would take ages, a lot of effort, and the end result would be pretty poor. The same goes for coding. If you really want to follow programming best practices, you must have the right tools to do your job. Is money an issue? No problem, there are plenty of open-source tools that you can use.

Code and Artifact Repositories
Code repositories. Are you coding an application together with other developers? No worries, you’ve got options. Code repositories like GitHub are used by millions of people, and Bitbucket, a cloud-based hosting service for projects, enables you to keep track of source code changes and versions.
Artifact repositories. Every time you commit a change, a continuous integration/continuous development (CI/CD) pipeline produces a build. Artifact repositories like Cloudrepo, npm, JFrog, enable you to store, organize, and share all builds, making them available for the whole team. They’re essential for rapid releases, easy version tracking, consistency, and enhanced collaboration.
CI/CD Pipeline Engines
Jenkins, GitLab, and AzureDevOps are among the most used CI/CD pipeline engines that enable developers to get continuous and effective feedback about their coding. Why did we include them in our programming best practices guide? Because they streamline software development and delivery, they enable you to develop higher-quality code, minimizing human error. How? Through automation of testing, production, and monitoring.

ci cd pipeline flow
The graphic shows the CI/CD pipeline flow.
Containers
How can you make your code work exactly the same on different infrastructures throughout the whole development lifecycle? Using virtual machines (VMs)? Yes, that could be an option, but do you really want to put all that burden on your CPU? Containerization software tools like open-source Docker or podman will run the software without killing your CPU while making your job much easier.

Integrated Development Environment (IDE)
Are you still using a simple text editor for your coding and switching from application to application just to check your code for errors? Then it’s time to switch to IDEs, the developers’ virtual workplace. An IDE includes all the basic tools needed to write and test your software (e.g., a source code editor, build automation tools, a debugger, and the possibility to install several different plugins). If you’re developing mobile applications, you’ll even get an emulator.

Using an IDE will help you boost your productivity and development speed by having everything you need at your fingertips. A few popular examples of IDEs include:

Eclipse IDE. One of the most popular IDEs for Java. It offers a sleek interface, includes drag-and-drop functionality, and the possibility to do static analysis. The same company also offers other IDEs supporting other languages.
eclipse org
Image source: Eclipse.org.
AWS Cloud9. This cloud-based IDE supports real-time analysis and more than 40 languages. It’ll enable you to write, run, and debug applications with just a browser, without installing a local IDE.
aws cloud9
Image source: AWS Cloud9.
SlickEdit. It’s a highly customizable IDE that supports more than 70 programming languages. It’s excellent for coders who need to develop in multiple languages across multiple platforms.
slickedit homepage
SlickEdit homepage
Visual Studio 2022. This IDE is suited for mobile and desktop apps but also works on Windows, Linux, and macOS. It has a wide range of features (e.g., debugging, real-time collaboration, version control, code completion tool, refactoring, etc.) and supports several languages.
visual studio 2022
Visual Studio 2022
7. Refactoring
Too busy to focus on small improvements? Think again. Taking the time to implement seemingly minor enhancements could make a big difference with regard to the quality of your code and project. Have you ever participated in “Fix-It Fridays”? At one of the companies I worked for, Friday was our development team’s fix-it day (unless there wasn’t an urgent issue to resolve of course). On that day of the week, every developer was free to pick something to work on and do some small improvements. Some examples include:

Fixing small bugs,
Testing a new library,
Reducing code complexity, and
Improving code readability, maintainability, structure or functionality.
This, essentially, describes refactoring: you clean your code without altering its behavior or creating new functionalities. How? Using some tools and applying some standard methods.

Tools
Do you remember the IDEs we talked about a few minutes ago? Many of those tools like Eclipse IDE and Visual Studio include automated refactoring, too, allowing you to speed up the process. Of course, automated refactoring isn’t essential as you can also opt for the manual method. But they can be a great help, especially when you don’t have a lot of time to dedicate to refactoring.

stepsize refactoring example
Stepsize refactoring example
Methods
Refactoring can be done in several ways. Let’s have a look at some of the most popular methods.

Refactoring in test-driven development (TDD). Very much used in the Agile methodology, tests are written before writing the code. If the test fails, the code is refactored and then tested again.
test driven development test
Refactoring is an important step of the test-driven development test.
Extract function. A piece of code is moved into a new method and renamed in a way that’s easier to understand its function. This helps reduce complexity and improve code readability.
example of extract function
An example of extract function included in Martin Fowler’s online refactoring samples catalog.
Extract variable. Did you find a piece of code with duplication or that it’s difficult to understand? This method will enable you to put the result of long and complex expressions (or part of them) into a less complex separate variable.
example of extract variable
Example of extract variable taken from a catalog summarizing all refactoring examples included in Martin Fowler’s book Refactoring.
Rename variable. Very often you find code that has variables with a confusing name. Check the example below; what does ‘a’ refer to?
flat a=height * width

It could be anything right? What if I write it like this instead?

flat area=height * width

Isn’t that clearer? This is what the renaming variable in refactoring does.

Now, we’ve gone through a bunch of programming best practices that could add that little something to your coding. However, if you choose to follow all or some of them, it might take you some time to get familiar with them. So why should you do it? This is what we’re going to answer next.

Why Should You Follow Programming Best Practices?
Have you ever tried to guide a blindfolded friend through a trail full of obstacles only using your verbal instructions? Believe me, it’s very hard. Instructions, if not clear enough, can be interpreted differently. Your friend may get on the wrong track or get a big lump on their head by bumping it against an obstacle because he misunderstood your guidance.

In a way, coding is like helping someone get through this obstacle trail without damage. Write your software code wrong and it may end up doing something totally different from what you expected. If you’re lucky, it could lead to a minor glitch or to a major security issue if you aren’t.

Here’s a cute example to demonstrate how unclear directions can lead to problems:


This is why programming best practices are there, to help you write a software that’s:

Reliable. In other words, it works as it should, all the time, without failure.
Secure. It’s impossible or very difficult to hack.
Maintainable. It can be repaired, improved, and expanded with ease.
Portable. It works in every environment without issues.
Testable. It can be easily tested. Tests can be automated and controlled without effort.
Safe. It doesn’t cause issues when used or implemented.
But what are the key benefits of following programming best practices?

Code uniformity. Often new developers join the team in the middle of a project. Following best practices will ensure that the code remains consistent even if different employees or contractors write it.
Fewer errors. As the errors will be easier to detect, the code will contain no or few mistakes.
Faster development, lower maintenance costs, and reduced time to market. By making the code simpler, easier to read, and maintain you’ll get effective high-quality software in a shorter amount of time.
Better employability. Following industry best practices is now included in the key requirements of many companies’ job descriptions.
And remember, like the game programmer John F. Woods once said, “Always code as if the guy who ends up maintaining your code will be a violent psychopath who knows where you live.”

Final Thoughts on the Ultimate Programming Best Practices Guide
Programming best practices are there to help developers ensure that all codes are written in a way that makes them secure against attackers, easy to read, test, use, and maintain by any authorized users. Because when we code, we write for others (those who’ll have to read it), not only for ourselves.

If you want to improve your programming skills and progress from being an amateur to a professional developer, you’ll definitely benefit by incorporating the best programming practices mentioned in this article into your software development routine.

Don’t wait any longer! Turn experience into expertise. Become a top performer that writes only error-free, efficient, and usable code.

CDS Logo
Contact
+1 (727) 291-0611

146 2nd St. N. #201C
St. Petersburg, FL 33701
United States

Facebook
Twitter
Code Signing Certificates
OV Code Signing Certificates
EV Code Signing Certificates
Cloud Signing Certificates
24/7 Customer Support
FAQs
+ 1 (727) 291-0611
support@codesigningstore.com
ChatChat Now
Microsoft Code Signing
Windows Code Signing
Authenticode Code Signing
Compare C# and .NET Code Signing
Driver Code signing
Windows Driver Code Signing
Kernel Mode Code Signing
PowerShell Code Signing
Visual Studio Code Signing
ClickOnce Signing
Visual Studio Code Signing
Other Code Signing
Java Code Signing
Electron Code Signing
Cheap Code Signing
Azure Key Vault Code Signing
Price Match and Moneyback
Payment we Accept
24/7 Support
24/7 Customer Support
Live Chat IconLive chat
Phone IconPhone
Email IconEmail
Trusted Site Seal
© 2025 The SSL Store™. A subsidiary of DigiCert, Inc. All rights reserved. Cookie Consent

Privacy Policy
Refund Policy
Disclaimer
Sitemap
Beta
0 / 10
used queries
1

Services






























Our Clients
About Us









Blog
Careers




Book a Call Today
HomeBlog

Software Development
Software Development
17 Software Development Best Practices for Writing Code in 2024
John McGuire
05/02/24
Software development best practices shape the journey from the conception of an idea to the deployment and maintenance of a high-quality software product. At the core of custom software development lies the Software Development Life Cycle (SDLC), a systematic and structured framework guiding developers through the entire software development process.

Table of Contents
Understanding the Software Development Life Cycle (SDLC)
The SDLC encapsulates the complete lifecycle of software, encompassing stages from initial ideation to deployment and subsequent maintenance. It serves as a blueprint for producing software architecture that not only meets customer expectations but is also delivered on time, within budget, and with the flexibility for future updates.

Phases of SDLC
Planning: During the initial phase of software engineering, the development process involves defining the project’s scope, objectives, timelines, and resource requirements. It sets the foundation for a structured development process.
Feasibility Study: A feasibility study evaluates the technical and financial viability of the project and ensures that the proposed solution aligns with the client’s needs and organisational capabilities.
Design: The design phase involves creating the architectural blueprint, technical specifications, and user interface. It lays the groundwork for the actual development process.
Implementation (Coding): During this phase, developers translate design specifications into actual code. Skilled developers write the code that will form the backbone of the software.
Testing: Rigorous testing identifies and rectifies bugs, to ensure the software aligns with predefined requirements. It is a critical step in achieving a high-quality end product.
Deployment: The software is released for use by end-users. It marks the culmination of the development process. This phase requires careful planning to ensure a smooth transition to the operational phase.
Maintenance and Support: Post-deployment, developers address issues, update features, and provide ongoing support to enhance the software’s longevity and relevance.
SDLC software engineering models such as Waterfall, Agile, and Iterative, offer distinct approaches to these phases. The choice of a specific model depends on project-specific factors like size, complexity, and client requirements. Each model introduces unique methodologies for managing the software development lifecycle.

Effective Management of SDLC in Software Architecture
Effective management of the SDLC is imperative for successful project delivery. Each phase is aligned with best practices, to ensure a seamless transition from one stage to the next. The success of the SDLC requires: 

Rigorous planning, 
Thorough testing, 
Continuous communication among team members. 
The Software Development Life Cycle is a guiding framework software developers use to produce top-tier software. It streamlines the development process and is used to maintain and update software to meet evolving needs. 

Adhering to SDLC best practices is the cornerstone of achieving excellence in software architecture.

17 best software development practices in 2024
Best Software Development Practices apply to software developers, project managers, and stakeholders alike. Following these best practices is paramount to project success. It fosters code quality and meets the ever-growing expectations of end-users. Neglecting software best practices can be severe, including compromised software quality missed project deadlines and escalating development costs. 

Let’s unravel the intricacies of these software project best practices and shed light on their indispensable role in steering projects towards triumph. 

Understand the Relevance of Best Practices in Software Development
Software development best practices shape the landscape of modern software engineering. It influences everything from project efficiency to the quality of the end product:

1. Ensuring Code Quality
One of the primary objectives of adopting software development best practices is ultimately to maintain high code quality. By following established coding standards, best practices, and design principles, developers create functional, readable, maintainable, and error-free code. 

2. Project Efficiency
Implementing best practices streamlines the development process, and fosters increased efficiency through:

Clear documentation
Collaborative coding workflows 
Adherence to coding standards
This efficiency translates into faster development cycles, timely project delivery, and cost-effectiveness.

3. Collaboration and Communication
Hiring dedicated developers with effective communication and collaboration skills in software development is important and these practices include: 

Code reviews
Collaborative coding environments
Consistent documentation
Clear communication ensures that all team members are on the same page, which contributes to a unified and coherent development process.

4. Bug Detection and Prevention
Software development practices, particularly testing methodologies and regular code reviews help teams identify and address bugs. Early bug detection prevents issues from escalating into larger problems during later stages of development. This proactive approach enhances the reliability of the software and minimizes the need for extensive debugging efforts.

5. Adaptability and Scalability
Software best practices promote adaptability and scalability in software projects. A well-structured codebase, modular design, and adherence to coding standards allow for easier integration of new features and functionalities to help keep pace with evolving user requirements and industry trends.

6. Project Success and Client Satisfaction
Software development best practices significantly contribute to overall project success and client satisfaction. High-quality software delivered on time and within budget enhances client confidence. Meeting or exceeding client expectations builds a positive reputation. It fosters long-term relationships and potential future collaborations.

7. Regulatory Compliance
Adhering to specific coding standards and practices is necessary for regulatory compliance. Following established guidelines ensures that software meets industry-specific standards and legal requirements. It reduces the risk of legal issues and facilitates a smoother regulatory approval process.

Software development practices are integral to the entire software development life cycle. They serve as a compass that guides developers towards robust, reliable, and scalable software solutions. The success of software development projects are driven by prioritising:

code quality, 
project efficiency
collaboration
bug prevention
adaptability
Client satisfaction
How to Apply Software Development Best Practices
Understanding what the best practices involve is the start. Learning how to apply them is the key to success in every project:

Leverage Standard Code Practices
Standard code practices enhance collaboration and ensure a uniform approach within development teams. Adhering to coding standards creates a common language and set of conventions that streamline communication and comprehension among team members.

Established programming norms enable teams to glean insights from the seasoned coding community. It enriches developers’ understanding of best practices, coding conventions, and efficient problem-solving approaches. Mentorship allows developers to refine their coding prowess by learning from experienced practitioners.

Standard practices facilitate more efficient collaboration and sets a foundation for consistent and high-quality code development. 

Emphasise Code Comprehensibility
Efficient communication within the realm of software development depends on the ability to render code easily understandable for all team members. Strategies that prioritize clarity and conciseness creates a collaborative environment. It enables developers to seamlessly interpret and build upon each other’s work. 

Code comprehensibility involves creating a narrative within the code that transcends individual understanding.

Clean code in software development best practices streamlines the coding process and reduces the likelihood of errors. Clean, comprehensible code is a shared language among team members. It fosters a collective understanding of the project’s architecture and design.

Code comprehensibility ensures a smooth and collaborative development process. It minimizes ambiguity and maximises clarity. It promotes a culture where developers can seamlessly navigate through the codebase, understand each other’s contributions, and collaborate towards the shared goal of delivering high-quality, error-free software.

3. Adopt Efficient Coding Workflows
Efficient coding workflows create a harmonious balance between creating new code and refining existing code to cultivate an efficient development process. The key is to implement best practices that enhance productivity and facilitate the seamless integration of new features. 

Here’s how you can adopt an efficient coding workflow:

Prioritise Incremental Development: Break large tasks into smaller, more manageable units to allow for a focused and iterative approach. This makes it easier to track progress and identify potential issues early in the development process.
Version Control: Version control systems like Git can help you manage code changes effectively. This allows multiple developers to collaborate simultaneously without conflicts, and it provides a safety net for rolling back changes if needed.
Automated Testing: You can implement automated testing practices to catch errors early and ensure code reliability. This includes unit testing, integration testing, and other relevant testing methodologies.
Continuous Integration/Continuous Deployment (CI/CD): Adopt CI/CD pipelines automate the process of integrating code changes and deploying applications. This accelerates the development lifecycle and reduces the chances of errors during deployment.
Code Reviews: A robust code review process where team members regularly review each other’s code. This collaborative effort helps maintain code quality, ensures adherence to coding standards, and facilitates knowledge sharing among team members.
Refactoring: Regularly revisit and refactor code to improve its structure, readability, and maintainability. This proactive approach prevents the accumulation of technical debt and enhances the overall health of the codebase.
Effective Communication: Foster clear communication channels within the development team. This includes regular stand-up meetings, documentation, and collaboration tools to ensure everyone is on the same page regarding project goals and individual responsibilities.
Agile Methodologies: Embrace agile methodologies like Scrum or Kanban. These methodologies emphasize flexibility, adaptability, and collaboration. It allows development teams to respond effectively to changing requirements and deliver incremental value.
Incorporating these practices into your coding workflows create an environment where developers can navigate the complexities of coding with precision, respond to changes efficiently, and deliver high-quality software in a timely manner.

5. Choose the Right Software Development Methodology
Consider the distinct characteristics of prevalent methodologies like Agile, Scrum, and Waterfall to help you make your choice based on project specifics. This will help align the methodology with the scope, goals, and team dynamics. This ensures a strategic approach that enhances collaboration, accelerates development, and aligns seamlessly with the unique demands of the software project.

6. Follow the YAGNI Principle
The “You Aren’t Gonna Need It” (YAGNI) principle is a fundamental concept in software development advocates for a pragmatic and streamlined approach to feature implementation. This principle is rooted in the idea of avoiding unnecessary complexities and functionalities in the development process. It encourages developers to prioritise and focus on essential features that directly align with the immediate project requirements.

YAGNI is a strategic guideline to prevent over-engineering and over-complicating a project. It helps developers refrain from  implementing unnecessary features. Development efforts are concentrated on delivering functionalities that directly contribute to the project’s objectives.

Efficient organisation and planning are key aspects of the YAGNI principle. It prompts teams to evaluate whether a proposed feature is crucial for the current project phase or if it introduces unnecessary complexity. This evaluation ensures that development resources are utilised judiciously and avoids the allocation of time and effort to functionalities that may not provide immediate value.

YAGNI is particularly relevant in agile methodologies, where adaptability and responsiveness to changing project needs are essential. The YAGNI principle helps development teams to maintain a focus on the most critical aspects of the project. This enhances resource efficiency and optimises the development process for better outcomes. YAGNI encourages developers to strike a balance between addressing current requirements and avoiding premature optimisation or feature implementation that may not be essential for the project’s success.

7. Harness Efficiency through Application Frameworks
Application frameworks as software development tools offer a structured foundation for building applications. With pre-built modules, reusable code, and a set structure, they reduce the need to start from scratch. This expedites the development process and ensures consistency and scalability.

Application frameworks streamline development, enhance code quality, and facilitate maintenance. The most suitable framework for your project aligns with its requirements and ensures a smoother and more efficient development journey.

8. Select the Right Language and Framework
Choosing the right programming language and framework profoundly shapes the entire software development process. It requires thoughtful evaluation of factors such as: 

project requirements, 
scalability, 
and cross-platform compatibility
Selecting the appropriate language and framework ensures efficient coding, which streamlines the development process and makes it more adaptable. 

9. Start with Clearly Defined Requirements
Software Requirements Specifications (SRSDs) guide developers through the project’s details. It is a common language that ensures that everyone in the development team and stakeholders understands the project’s goals. Effective SRSD generation techniques, such as collaborative workshops and user interviews, help developers to create a strong foundation for consistent project outcomes.

Clear requirements help developers
make smart decisions
use resources wisely
and deliver a product that meets everyone’s expectations. 
Clear requirements lay the groundwork for project success and reduce the risks of confusion or changing expectations.]

10. Collaboration and Code Reviews
Team collaboration enhances creativity, problem-solving, and ultimately, a better end product. One vital aspect of this collaboration is code reviews.

Code reviews are peer reviews performed to ensure quality and adherence to coding standards. This collaborative process helps catch errors early and fosters knowledge sharing and continuous improvement. 

Multiple sets of eyes on the code provide developers with valuable insights. It helps them identify potential issues, and collectively contribute to the overall quality of the software. Code reviews help maintain a high standard of code and promote a culture of teamwork and excellence within the development team.

11. Testing Best Practices
Testing best practices help guarantee the excellence of code quality in software development. Among these practices, unit testing takes a prominent role. It involves the meticulous examination of individual components of the software in isolation. This process is initiated before the actual coding begins. It allows developers to identify and rectify errors at an early stage of the development cycle.

The proactive approach prioritises unit tests before the coding phase yields multiple advantages. It serves as a preventive measure to ensure that potential issues are caught early and to prevent them from evolving into more complex problems during subsequent stages. 

Unit testing as a best practice allows developers not only fortify the robustness of their software but also economise time and resources. This approach minimizes the need for extensive debugging later in the development process. It fosters a more efficient and streamlined software development lifecycle. 

12. Apply Refactoring Frequently
Refactoring involves restructuring code to enhance its clarity and efficiency. Through refactoring, developers can ensure adaptability and flexibility in their codebase. 

Applying refactoring techniques improves the maintainability of the software and it facilitates future enhancements. It’s a strategic approach that keeps the codebase agile, and makes it easier to navigate and modify as project requirements evolve. Refactoring as a best practice fosters a codebase that stands the test of time.

13. Maintain Staging and Production Environments
Separate staging and production environments ensure that changes can be thoroughly tested in a controlled staging environment before being deployed to the live production system. Developers can prevent potential issues from affecting the end-users by identifying and fixing bugs in the staging environment. This approach enhances the reliability and stability of the software, and contributes to a smoother and more secure deployment process. It’s a proactive measure to guarantee that only thoroughly tested and verified changes reach the production environment.

14. Use Version Control Systems
Version control systems, such as Git or GitHub, provide numerous benefits in software development. These systems enable simultaneous development as it allows multiple developers to work on different aspects of the project concurrently.

Additionally, version control mitigates conflicts by tracking changes made by each contributor to facilitate a seamless integration process. This ensures a collaborative and organized approach to development. It enhances overall project efficiency and reduces the likelihood of errors resulting from conflicting changes. Version control is indispensable for maintaining code integrity and fostering a well-coordinated development environment.

15. Utilise an Issue Tracker
Effectively using an issue tracker in software development helps identify and resolve problems systematically. Issue tracking tools enhance project management as it provides a centralised platform to document and address challenges. They enable teams to categorize, prioritize, and monitor issues to ensure a streamlined workflow. 

Developers can use issue trackers to enhance collaboration, promptly address concerns, and maintain a clear overview of project progress. 

16. Design Before Coding
Designing before coding is a foundational principle in software development, underscoring the need to envision the complete software application before commencing the coding process. This strategic approach is essential for several reasons. Firstly, it facilitates the early identification of potential issues and challenges that may arise during development, enabling proactive problem-solving.

By thoroughly outlining the software’s design in advance, developers gain a comprehensive understanding of the project’s structure and requirements. This clarity significantly diminishes the likelihood of misunderstandings or misalignments with project goals. A detailed design provides a structured and organised framework for developers to follow.

The proactive design-first approach reduces the risk of errors and streamlines the entire development lifecycle. This best practice contributes to heightened project efficiency, as it enables developers to deliver a high-quality software product that meets or exceeds client expectations.

17. Communication and Collaboration
By facilitating open and transparent communication as a software development best practice, development teams can:

align their efforts

share insights

and address challenges collaboratively.

Communication in software development is a proactive approach that enhances team cohesion, accelerates decision-making processes, and contributes to the overall success of agile methodologies in delivering high-quality software solutions. Clear communication ensures collaborative success in agile software development.

Future Trends in Software Engineering Practices
As technology advances and software development trends change, future trends in software engineering practices are marked by the increasing integration of automation and artificial intelligence (AI). This evolution aims to enhance coding standards and streamline development processes. 

Automation tools assist developers in tasks like code analysis and testing, boosting efficiency and minimizing errors. AI provides intelligent insights, optimises algorithms, and automates routine tasks. 

These trends enable software developers to stay at the forefront of technological advancements. It helps them harness the full potential of cutting-edge tools and methodologies for superior software engineering outcomes.

Software development best practices and adhering to established standards, collaboration, and strategic planning drive code quality and project success. It encourages the consistent implementation of these best practices in fostering a culture of excellence within software development teams. 

As a software developer, committing to these principles ensures the timely delivery of high-quality software and adaptability to emerging challenges and advancements in software engineering.

John McGuire
John McGuire
Scale your business with innovative digital solutions.
Book a Call Today
Image of a woman drawing on a white board discussing a development project to another man in a blue shirt
Services.
Custom Software Development
Mobile App Development
Digital Strategy Consulting
Web Design & Development
React Native Development

Technologies.
AngularJS Development
Python Development

Useful Links.
About Us
Case Studies
Blog
AWS Partner
Azure Partner
Pulsion Tech Talks
White Papers
FAQ

Hire a Developer.
Hire Dedicated Developers
Hire ReactJS Developers

Our Network.
Risk Assessment and Compliance Software
Requirements Gathering Software
Free Estimate Software for Tradespeople

© 2025 Pulsion Technology | Terms & Conditions | Privacy Policy

Get in Touch.
Book a Call Today
+44 (0)141 352 2280

info@pulsion.co.uk

5 Eagle Street, Craighall Business Park, Glasgow, G4 9XA




Gold Microsoft Partner Logo
Beta
0 / 10
used queries
1
Skip to content
Unlimited fonts, graphic templates, mockups, add-ons & more From $16.50/m
Envato|Tuts+ YouTube|Sign In
envato-tuts+
 Design Business Photo Video Web Design
Software
WordPress
HTML/CSS
Email
UX/UI
SEO
eCommerce
 Code Music
Search tutorials...

Advertisement
Home Web Design HTML/CSS HTML
Top 18 Best Practices for Writing Super Readable Code
Code readability is fundamental for development—it is key to maintainability and working together with a team. This article will detail the 18 most important best practices when writing readable code.
Scroll to top
Burak Guzel
Burak Guzel
Apr 20, 2021 • 12 min read
44


English
HTML/CSS HTML CSS
Code readability is fundamental for development—it is key to maintainability and working together with a team. This article will detail the 18 most important best practices when writing readable code. 

1. Commenting & Documentation
IDEs (Integrated Development Environments) and code editors have come a long way in the past few years. This has made commenting your code more useful than ever. Following certain standards in your comments allows IDEs and other tools to utilize them in different ways.

Consider this example:

Make your best work yet
How? By signing up to receive tips, tricks, and offers designed to make you stand out.
Enter your email
Sign up
By signing up I confirm I have read Envato's Privacy Policy.
Side image
VSCode User Comments
The comments I added to the function definition can be previewed whenever I use that function, even from other files.

Here is another example where I call a function from a third-party library:

VSCode 3rd Party documentation 
In these particular examples, the type of commenting (or documentation) used is based on PHPDoc, and the IDE is Visual Studio Code.

2. Consistent Indentation
I assume you already know that you should indent your code. However, it's also worth noting that it is a good idea to keep your indentation style consistent.

There's more than one way of indenting code.

Style 1
function foo() {
	if ($maybe) {
		do_it_now();
		again();
	} else {
		abort_mission();
	}
	finalize();
}
Style 2
function foo()
{
	if ($maybe)
	{
		do_it_now();
		again();
	}
	else
	{
		abort_mission();
	}
	finalize();
}
Style 3
function foo()
{	if ($maybe)
	{	do_it_now();
		again();
	}
	else
	{	abort_mission();
	}
	finalize();
}
I used to code in style 2 but recently switched to style 1. But that is only a matter of preference. There is no "best" style that everyone should be following. Actually, the best style is a consistent style. If you are part of a team or if you are contributing code to a project, you should follow the existing style that is being used in that project.

The indentation styles are not always completely distinct from one another. Sometimes, they mix different rules. For example, in PEAR Coding Standards, the opening bracket "{" goes on the same line as control structures, but they go to the next line after function definitions.

PEAR Style:

function foo()
{                     // placed on the next line 
    if ($maybe) {     // placed on the same line 
        do_it_now();
        again();
    } else {
        abort_mission();
    }
    finalize();
}
Also note that they are using four spaces instead of tabs for indentations.

On Wikipedia, you can see samples of different indent styles.

3. Avoid Obvious Comments
Commenting your code is fantastic; however, it can be overdone or just be plain redundant. Take this example:

// get the country code 
$country_code = get_country_code($_SERVER['REMOTE_ADDR']);
// if country code is US 
if ($country_code == 'US') {
	// display the form input for state 
	echo form_input_state();
}
When the text is that obvious, it's really not productive to repeat it within comments.

If you must comment on that code, you can simply combine it to a single line instead:

// display state selection for US users 
$country_code = get_country_code($_SERVER['REMOTE_ADDR']);
if ($country_code == 'US') {
	echo form_input_state();
}
Comments should ideally explain why you were doing something the way you did it. If you have to write more than a one-line comment to explain what the code is doing, you should consider rewriting the code to be more readable.

4. Code Grouping
More often than not, certain tasks require a few lines of code. It is a good idea to keep these tasks within separate blocks of code, with some spaces between them.

Here is a simplified example:

// get list of forums 
$forums = array();
$r = mysql_query("SELECT id, name, description FROM forums");
while ($d = mysql_fetch_assoc($r)) {
	$forums []= $d;
}
// load the templates 
load_template('header');
load_template('forum_list',$forums);
load_template('footer');
Adding a comment at the beginning of each block of code also emphasizes the visual separation.

Advertisement
5. Consistent Naming Scheme
PHP itself is sometimes guilty of not following consistent naming schemes:

strpos() vs. str_split()
imagetypes() vs. image_type_to_extension()
First of all, the names should have word boundaries. There are two popular options:

camelCase: The first letter of each word is capitalized, except the first word, like parseRawImageData().
underscores: Underscores between words, like mysql_real_escape_string().
Having different options creates a situation similar to the indent styles, as I mentioned earlier. If an existing project follows a certain convention, you should go with that. Also, some language platforms tend to use a certain naming scheme. For instance, in Java, most code uses camelCase names, while in PHP, the majority of code uses underscores.

These can also be mixed. Some developers prefer to use underscores for procedural functions and class names, but use camelCase for class method names:

class Foo_Bar {
	public function someDummyMethod() {
	}
}
function procedural_function_name() {
}
So again, there is no obvious "best" style. Just be consistent.

6. DRY Principle
DRY stands for Don't Repeat Yourself. Also known as DIE: Duplication is Evil.

The principle states:

"Every piece of knowledge must have a single, unambiguous, authoritative representation within a system." — Wikipedia

The purpose for most applications (or computers in general) is to automate repetitive tasks. This principle should be maintained in all code, even web applications. The same piece of code should not be repeated over and over again.

For example, most web applications consist of many pages. It's highly likely that these pages will contain common elements. Headers and footers are usually the best candidates for this. It's not a good idea to keep copying and pasting these headers and footers into every page. Instead, put that header and footer code in separate source files to be included wherever they are needed.

$this->load->view('includes/header');
$this->load->view($main_content);
$this->load->view('includes/footer');
7. Avoid Deep Nesting
Too many levels of nesting can make code harder to read and follow.

function do_stuff() {
// ... 
	if (is_writable($folder)) {
		if ($fp = fopen($file_path,'w')) {
			if ($stuff = get_some_stuff()) {
				if (fwrite($fp,$stuff)) {
					// ... 
				} else {
					return false;
				}
			} else {
				return false;
			}
		} else {
			return false;
		}
	} else {
		return false;
	}
}
For the sake of readability, it is usually possible to make changes to your code to reduce the level of nesting:

function do_stuff() {
// ... 
	if (!is_writable($folder)) {
		return false;
	}
	if (!$fp = fopen($file_path,'w')) {
		return false;
	}
	if (!$stuff = get_some_stuff()) {
		return false;
	}
	if (fwrite($fp,$stuff)) {
		// ... 
	} else {
		return false;
	}
}
Advertisement
8. Limit Line Length
Our eyes are more comfortable when reading tall and narrow columns of text. This is precisely the reason why newspaper articles look like this:

columns of text in a newspaper 
It is a good practice to avoid writing horizontally long lines of code.

// bad 
$my_email->set_from('test@email.com')->add_to('programming@gmail.com')->set_subject('Methods Chained')->set_body('Some long message')->send();
// good 
$my_email
	->set_from('test@email.com')
	->add_to('programming@gmail.com')
	->set_subject('Methods Chained')
	->set_body('Some long message')
	->send();
// bad 
$query = "SELECT id, username, first_name, last_name, status FROM users LEFT JOIN user_posts USING(users.id, user_posts.user_id) WHERE post_id = '123'";
// good 
$query = "SELECT id, username, first_name, last_name, status 
FROM users 
LEFT JOIN user_posts USING(users.id, user_posts.user_id) 
WHERE post_id = '123'";
Also, if anyone intends to read the code from a terminal window, such as Vim users, it is a good idea to limit the line length to around 80 characters.

9. File and Folder Organization
Technically, you could write an entire application's code within a single file. But that would be a nightmare to read and maintain.

During my first programming projects, I knew about the idea of creating "include files." However, I was not yet even remotely organized. I created an inc folder, with two files in it: db.php and functions.php. As the applications grew, the functions file also became huge and unmaintainable.

10. Consistent Temporary Names
Normally, the variables should be descriptive and contain one or more words. But this doesn't necessarily apply to temporary variables. They can be as short as a single character.

It is a good practice to use consistent names for your temporary variables that have the same kind of role. Here are a few examples that I tend to use in my code:

// $i for loop counters 
for ($i = 0; $i < 100; $i++) {
	// $j for the nested loop counters 
	for ($j = 0; $j < 100; $j++) {
	}
}
// $ret for return variables 
function foo() {
	$ret['bar'] = get_bar();
	$ret['stuff'] = get_stuff();
	return $ret;
}
// $k and $v in foreach 
foreach ($some_array as $k => $v) {
}
// $q, $r and $d for mysql 
$q = "SELECT * FROM table";
$r = mysql_query($q);
while ($d = mysql_fetch_assocr($r)) {
}
// $fp for file pointers 
$fp = fopen('file.txt','w');
11. Capitalize SQL Special Words
Database interaction is a big part of most web applications. If you are writing raw SQL queries, it is a good idea to keep them readable as well.

Even though SQL special words and function names are case insensitive, it is common practice to capitalize them to distinguish them from your table and column names.

SELECT id, username FROM user;
UPDATE user SET last_login = NOW()
WHERE id = '123'
SELECT id, username FROM user u
LEFT JOIN user_address ua ON(u.id = ua.user_id)
WHERE ua.state = 'NY'
GROUP BY u.id
ORDER BY u.username
LIMIT 0,20
12. Separation of Code and Data
This is another principle that applies to almost all programming languages in all environments. In the case of web development, the "data" usually implies HTML output.

When PHP was first released many years ago, it was primarily seen as a template engine. It was common to have big HTML files with a few lines of PHP code in between. However, things have changed over the years, and websites have become more and more dynamic and functional. The code is now a huge part of web applications, and it is no longer a good practice to combine it with the HTML.

You can either apply the principle to your application by yourself, or you can use a third-party tool (template engines, frameworks, or CMSs) and follow their conventions.

13. Alternate Syntax Inside Templates
You may choose not to use a fancy template engine, and instead go with plain inline PHP in your template files. This does not necessarily violate the "Separation of Code and Data," as long as the inline code is directly related to the output and is readable. In this case, you should consider using the alternate syntax for control structures.

Here is an example:

<div class="user_controls">
	<?php if ($user = Current_User::user()): ?>
		Hello, <em><?php echo $user->username; ?></em> <br/>
		<?php echo anchor('logout', 'Logout'); ?>
	<?php else: ?>
		<?php echo anchor('login','Login'); ?> |
		<?php echo anchor('signup', 'Register'); ?>
	<?php endif; ?>
</div>
<h1>My Message Board</h1>
<?php foreach($categories as $category): ?>
	<div class="category">
		<h2><?php echo $category->title; ?></h2>
		<?php foreach($category->Forums as $forum): ?>
			<div class="forum">
				<h3>
					<?php echo anchor('forums/'.$forum->id, $forum->title) ?>
					(<?php echo $forum->Threads->count(); ?> threads)
				</h3>
				<div class="description">
					<?php echo $forum->description; ?>
				</div>
			</div>
		<?php endforeach; ?>
	</div>
<?php endforeach; ?>
This lets you avoid lots of curly braces. Also, the code looks and feels similar to the way HTML is structured and indented.

14. Object-Oriented vs. Procedural
Object-oriented programming can help you create well-structured code. But that does not mean you need to abandon procedural programming completely. Actually, creating a mix of both styles can be good.

Objects should be used for representing data, usually residing in a database.

class User {
	public $username;
	public $first_name;
	public $last_name;
	public $email;
	public function __construct() {
		// ... 
	}
	public function create() {
		// ... 
	}
	public function save() {
		// ... 
	}
	public function delete() {
		// ... 
	}
}
Procedural functions may be used for specific tasks that can be performed independently.

function capitalize($string) {
	$ret = strtoupper($string[0]);
	$ret .= strtolower(substr($string,1));
	return $ret;
}
15. Read Open-Source Code
Open-source projects are built with the input of many developers. These projects need to maintain a high level of code readability so that the team can work together as efficiently as possible. Therefore, it is a good idea to browse through the source code of these projects to observe what these developers are doing.

open source code example
16. Use Meaningful Names for Variables and Functions
You will save a lot of your precious time by using meaningful names for variables and functions. This may not seem like a big deal when you are just starting out and the programs you write are just a couple of dozen lines long. However, things get very confusing fairly quickly for code that has hundreds or thousands of lines.

Consider an example, where you have two variables $is_vaccine_available and $iva. In a large program, it won't be easy to guess what purpose $iva serves without looking through some relevant lines of code. On the other hand, you can guess that the variable $is_vaccine_available is almost certainly being used to store the status of vaccine availability.

Trying to save time by using very short names for variables and functions is counter-productive in the long run, especially when there are a lot of capable code editors and IDEs available to help you write code.

17. Avoid Using Magic Numbers
The concept of magic numbers in programming refers to the use of hard-coded numerical values in your code. Using such numbers might make sense to you while you are writing the code. However, you or someone else will most probably have a hard time figuring out what that number was supposed to do when they look at the same piece of code in future.

<?php
while($egg_count > 400) {
    // Do something 
}
$container_capacity = 400;
while($egg_count > $container_capacity) {
    // Do Something 
}
?>
Considering the code above, in the first case, we have no idea what the 400 signifies. Is it the count of people who will be served eggs, or is it something else? On the other hand, we know very clearly in the second case that we are checking if our egg count is over the container capacity.

It is also easier to update the $container_capacity by changing its value in one place. This will not be possible when using magic numbers as you will have to go through the whole code.

18. Code Refactoring
When you "refactor," you make changes to the code without changing any of its functionality. You can think of it like a "cleanup," for the sake of improving readability and quality.

This doesn't include bug fixes or the addition of any new functionality. You might refactor code that you have written the day before, while it's still fresh in your head, so that it is more readable and reusable when you may potentially look at it two months from now. As the motto says: "refactor early, refactor often."

You may apply any of the "best practices" of code readability during the refactoring process.

Conclusions
I hope you enjoyed this article! Code readability is a huge topic, and it's well worth thinking more about, whether you work alone, with a team, or on a large open-source project.

This post has been updated with contributions from Monty Shokeen. Monty is a full-stack developer who also loves to write tutorials and to learn about new JavaScript libraries.

Burak Guzel
By
Burak Guzel
Like


Advertisement
Looking for something to help kick start your next project?
Envato Market has a range of items for sale to help get you started.

WordPress Themes
From $13

Magento Themes
From $17

ECommerce Websites
From $16

HTML5 Templates
From $4
envato-tuts+
Learn how to create 3D models with Spline!
From the basics of 3D modelling to textures, lighting and animation.
Watch now


Unlimited Downloads
From $16.50/month
Get access to over one million creative assets on Envato.

Over 9 Million Digital Assets
Everything you need for your next creative project.

Create Beautiful Logos, Designs
& Mockups in Seconds
Design like a professional without Photoshop.

Join the Community
Share ideas. Host meetups. Lead discussions. Collaborate.
Envato Tuts+
About Envato Tuts+
Terms of Use
Privacy
Cookies
Cookie Settings
Do not sell or share my personal information
Help
FAQ
Help Center
envato-tuts+
25,380
Tutorials
553
Courses
18,690
Translations
B Corp logo
EnvatoEnvato MarketPlaceit by EnvatoAll productsCareersSitemap
© 2025 Envato Pty Ltd. Trademarks and brands are the property of their respective owners.
YoutubeInstagramTiktokFacebookTwitterPinterest

Advertisement
Beta
0 / 10
used queries
fastercapital logo
Homepage
Portfolio
About
Programs
Services
LearnHub
Partner
Contact
Home  Topics  Coding Best Practices
Coding Best Practices

This page is a digest about this topic. It is a compilation from various blogs that discuss it. Each title is linked to the original blog.

 Free Help and discounts from FasterCapital!
1
2
1.Coding Best Practices[Original Blog]
1. Consistent Code Formatting and Style:

- Why it matters: Consistency in code formatting and style improves readability and collaboration. When team members follow the same conventions, it becomes easier to understand and maintain the codebase.

- Best practices:

- Indentation: Choose a consistent indentation style (e.g., spaces or tabs) and stick to it throughout the project.

- Naming Conventions: Use descriptive variable and function names. Follow conventions like camelCase, snake_case, or PascalCase based on the language.

- Line Length: Limit lines to a reasonable length (usually 80-120 characters) to prevent horizontal scrolling.

- Comments: Add meaningful comments to explain complex logic, assumptions, or edge cases.

- Example:

```python

# Good: Descriptive variable names

User_age = 30

# Bad: Unclear variable name

X = 30

```
2. Error Handling and Exception Management:

- Why it matters: Proper error handling prevents unexpected crashes and improves user experience.

- Best practices:

- Try-Except Blocks: Wrap risky code in try-except blocks to handle exceptions gracefully.

- Specific Exceptions: Catch specific exceptions rather than using a generic `except`.

- Logging: Log errors with relevant context information.

- Example:

```python

Try:

Result = divide(a, b)

Except ZeroDivisionError:

Logger.error("Cannot divide by zero.")

```
3. Code Reusability and Modularity:

- Why it matters: Reusable code reduces redundancy and promotes efficient development.

- Best practices:

- Functions and Classes: Break down functionality into smaller functions or classes.

- DRY Principle: Don't Repeat Yourself. Extract common logic into reusable components.

- Imports: Organize imports and avoid unnecessary ones.

- Example:

```python

# Good: Reusable function

Def calculate_total(items):

Return sum(items)

# Bad: Repeated code

Total = sum(prices)

```
4. testing and Test-Driven development (TDD):

- Why it matters: Robust testing ensures code correctness and prevents regressions.

- Best practices:

- Unit Tests: Write unit tests for individual functions and methods.

- TDD: Write tests before implementing functionality.

- Test Coverage: Aim for high test coverage.

- Example:

```python

Def test_calculate_total():

Items = [10, 20, 30]

Assert calculate_total(items) == 60

```
5. Version Control and Git Etiquette:

- Why it matters: Proper version control streamlines collaboration and code management.

- Best practices:

- Commit Messages: Write descriptive commit messages.

- Branching Strategy: Follow a consistent branching model (e.g., Gitflow).

- Pull Requests: Review and discuss changes before merging.

- Example:

```
Feat: Add user authentication (#123)

```
Remember, these best practices are not rigid rules but guidelines. Adapt them to your project's context and team dynamics. By incorporating these practices, you'll contribute to a healthier and more efficient development process.

Coding Best Practices - Coding and categorization Mastering Coding and Categorization Techniques: A Comprehensive Guide
 
 
 
 
Coding Best Practices - Coding and categorization Mastering Coding and Categorization Techniques: A Comprehensive Guide

2.Implementing Secure Coding Practices in Agile Development[Original Blog]
Implementing a Secure
Secure coding practices are essential for developing software that is free from vulnerabilities and defects that could compromise its functionality, reliability, or security. However, implementing secure coding practices in agile development can be difficult, as agile teams often face tight deadlines, changing requirements, and frequent iterations. How can agile teams ensure that their code is secure without compromising their agility and productivity? In this section, we will explore some of the best practices and tools that can help agile teams achieve secure coding in their software development lifecycle. We will also discuss some of the benefits and challenges of secure coding in agile development from different perspectives, such as developers, testers, managers, and customers.

Some of the best practices and tools for implementing secure coding in agile development are:

1. Adopt a security mindset. Agile teams should adopt a security mindset from the start of the project, and not treat security as an afterthought or a separate phase. Security should be integrated into every aspect of the software development lifecycle, from planning and design to coding and testing. Agile teams should also be aware of the common security risks and threats that affect their software domain, and follow the principles of secure design, such as least privilege, defense in depth, and fail-safe defaults.

2. Use secure coding standards and guidelines. Secure coding standards and guidelines are sets of rules and best practices that help developers write code that is secure, consistent, and maintainable. They can also help prevent common coding errors and vulnerabilities, such as buffer overflows, SQL injection, and cross-site scripting. Agile teams should adopt and follow secure coding standards and guidelines that are relevant to their programming languages, frameworks, and platforms. Some examples of secure coding standards and guidelines are OWASP Secure Coding Practices, CERT Secure Coding Standards, and Microsoft Secure Coding Guidelines.

3. Perform code reviews and audits. Code reviews and audits are processes of examining and evaluating the quality and security of the code written by developers. They can help identify and fix coding errors, bugs, and vulnerabilities, as well as improve the readability, performance, and maintainability of the code. Code reviews and audits can be performed manually by peers, experts, or third parties, or automatically by tools, such as static code analysis tools, dynamic code analysis tools, and code quality metrics tools. Agile teams should perform code reviews and audits regularly and frequently, preferably before each iteration or release.

4. Implement automated testing and continuous integration. Automated testing and continuous integration are practices that help agile teams ensure that their code is working as expected and meets the quality and security standards. Automated testing involves using tools, such as unit testing tools, integration testing tools, and security testing tools, to run tests on the code and verify its functionality, reliability, and security. Continuous integration involves using tools, such as version control systems, build tools, and deployment tools, to integrate, build, and deploy the code continuously and automatically. Agile teams should implement automated testing and continuous integration as part of their daily workflow, and use the feedback and results to improve their code quality and security.

5. educate and train the team. Education and training are important for agile teams to learn and update their knowledge and skills on secure coding practices and tools. Education and training can help agile teams understand the security concepts, principles, and techniques, as well as the security risks and challenges that affect their software domain. Education and training can also help agile teams learn how to use the secure coding practices and tools effectively and efficiently. Agile teams should educate and train themselves regularly and continuously, by attending courses, workshops, webinars, conferences, or online resources, such as blogs, podcasts, videos, or books.

Implementing secure coding practices in agile development can bring many benefits and challenges to different stakeholders, such as:

- Developers. Developers are the ones who write the code and implement the secure coding practices and tools. For developers, the benefits of secure coding in agile development include: improving their code quality and security, reducing their technical debt and rework, enhancing their professional reputation and skills, and increasing their confidence and satisfaction. However, the challenges of secure coding in agile development for developers include: adapting to the changing requirements and expectations, learning and using new practices and tools, balancing the trade-offs between security and other factors, such as functionality, usability, and performance, and dealing with the pressure and stress of tight deadlines and frequent iterations.

- Testers. Testers are the ones who test the code and verify its quality and security. For testers, the benefits of secure coding in agile development include: simplifying their testing process and scope, increasing their testing coverage and effectiveness, detecting and preventing more defects and vulnerabilities, and collaborating and communicating better with the developers. However, the challenges of secure coding in agile development for testers include: keeping up with the fast-paced and dynamic development environment, learning and using new testing practices and tools, finding and reporting the root causes and impacts of the defects and vulnerabilities, and prioritizing and resolving the testing issues and feedback.

- Managers. Managers are the ones who manage and oversee the agile teams and projects. For managers, the benefits of secure coding in agile development include: delivering more secure and reliable software products and services, meeting the customer and stakeholder expectations and requirements, complying with the legal and regulatory standards and obligations, and reducing the costs and risks of security breaches and incidents. However, the challenges of secure coding in agile development for managers include: planning and allocating the resources and budget for security, monitoring and measuring the security performance and progress, supporting and motivating the agile teams and individuals, and resolving the conflicts and trade-offs between security and other objectives, such as time, scope, and quality.

- Customers. Customers are the ones who use and benefit from the software products and services. For customers, the benefits of secure coding in agile development include: receiving more secure and reliable software products and services, enjoying more features and functionalities, having more trust and confidence in the software providers and vendors, and protecting their data and privacy. However, the challenges of secure coding in agile development for customers include: providing and validating the security requirements and feedback, understanding and accepting the security limitations and trade-offs, updating and maintaining the software products and services, and coping with the changes and updates of the software products and services.

Implementing Secure Coding Practices in Agile Development - Agile Security: How to Secure and Protect Your Software in Agile Development
 
 
 
 
Implementing Secure Coding Practices in Agile Development - Agile Security: How to Secure and Protect Your Software in Agile Development

3.Implementing Effective Billing and Coding Practices[Original Blog]
One of the most crucial aspects of optimizing your annual revenue cycle is implementing effective billing and coding practices. Billing and coding are the processes of translating medical services and procedures into standardized codes and submitting claims to insurance companies or other payers. These processes affect the accuracy, timeliness, and reimbursement of your revenue cycle. In this section, we will discuss some of the best practices for billing and coding that can help you reduce errors and delays, improve compliance, and increase your revenue. Some of these practices are:

1. Use certified and trained coders. Coding is a complex and dynamic field that requires specialized knowledge and skills. Coders need to be familiar with various coding systems, such as ICD-10, CPT, and HCPCS, as well as the latest updates and changes. They also need to understand the medical documentation and terminology, the payer policies and guidelines, and the compliance regulations. Hiring certified and trained coders can ensure that your coding is accurate, consistent, and compliant, which can reduce the risk of denials, audits, and penalties.

2. Implement a coding audit program. A coding audit is a systematic review of the coding quality and accuracy performed by an internal or external auditor. A coding audit can help you identify and correct any coding errors, inconsistencies, or discrepancies, as well as provide feedback and education to your coders. A coding audit can also help you measure and improve your coding performance, such as your coding accuracy rate, your coding productivity, and your coding compliance. You should conduct regular and random coding audits, as well as targeted audits for specific areas of concern, such as high-risk or high-volume codes, new or revised codes, or new or changed payer policies.

3. Use technology and automation. Technology and automation can help you streamline and simplify your billing and coding processes, as well as enhance your accuracy and efficiency. For example, you can use electronic health records (EHRs) to capture and store your medical documentation, which can reduce the need for manual data entry and paper records. You can also use software tools, such as computer-assisted coding (CAC), to generate and validate your codes, which can reduce the human error and variability. You can also use software tools, such as claim scrubbers, to check and edit your claims, which can reduce the rejections and denials. However, you should not rely solely on technology and automation, but rather use them as a supplement and a support to your human coders.

4. Communicate and collaborate with your stakeholders. Billing and coding are not isolated processes, but rather involve multiple stakeholders, such as your physicians, your coders, your billers, your payers, and your patients. effective communication and collaboration among these stakeholders can help you ensure that your billing and coding are accurate, timely, and complete, as well as resolve any issues or disputes that may arise. For example, you should communicate and collaborate with your physicians to ensure that they provide clear and complete medical documentation, which is the basis of your coding. You should also communicate and collaborate with your coders and billers to ensure that they follow the same standards and procedures, which can improve your consistency and efficiency. You should also communicate and collaborate with your payers to ensure that you understand and follow their policies and guidelines, which can improve your compliance and reimbursement. You should also communicate and collaborate with your patients to ensure that they understand and pay their bills, which can improve your collections and satisfaction.

Implementing Effective Billing and Coding Practices - Annual Revenue Cycle: How to Optimize Your Annual Revenue Cycle and Reduce Your Billing Errors and Delays
 
 
 
 
Implementing Effective Billing and Coding Practices - Annual Revenue Cycle: How to Optimize Your Annual Revenue Cycle and Reduce Your Billing Errors and Delays

4.Implementing Effective Billing and Coding Practices[Original Blog]
1. Understanding the Importance of Billing and Coding:

Effective billing and coding practices are the backbone of any successful healthcare organization. In the laboratory setting, accurate coding ensures that services provided are appropriately reimbursed by payers. It also impacts patient satisfaction, compliance, and overall financial health. Let's break down the nuances:

- Accurate Documentation: Proper documentation is the foundation. Clinical staff must record detailed information about tests performed, diagnoses, and procedures. This documentation serves as the basis for coding and billing.

- Coding Systems: Laboratories primarily use Current Procedural Terminology (CPT) codes for procedures and International Classification of Diseases (ICD) codes for diagnoses. Understanding these systems is crucial for accurate coding.

- Reimbursement Rates: Different payers (e.g., Medicare, private insurers) have varying reimbursement rates for specific CPT codes. Billing teams must stay informed about these rates to optimize revenue.

- Compliance: Compliance with regulations (e.g., HIPAA, Stark Law) is essential. Non-compliance can lead to penalties and revenue loss.

2. Best Practices for Effective Billing and Coding:

Let's explore practical strategies to enhance billing and coding processes:

- Regular Training and Education:

- Continuous training for coding and billing staff ensures they stay updated with changes in codes, regulations, and payer policies.

- Webinars, workshops, and certification programs help maintain proficiency.

- Clear Communication Between Departments:

- Collaboration between laboratory, clinical, and billing departments is critical.

- Regular meetings to discuss coding updates, documentation challenges, and denials prevent communication gaps.

- Automated Systems and Tools:

- Implementing robust laboratory information systems (LIS) and billing software streamlines workflows.

- Automated code suggestions based on test orders can reduce errors.

- Auditing and Quality Assurance:

- Regular internal audits identify coding errors, compliance gaps, and revenue leakage.

- External audits by certified professionals provide an unbiased assessment.

- Denial Management:

- Analyze denied claims to identify patterns.

- Address common issues (e.g., missing documentation, incorrect codes) promptly.

3. Examples to Illustrate Key Concepts:

Let's consider scenarios:

- Example 1:

- A laboratory performs a comprehensive metabolic panel (CPT code 80053) for a patient.

- The coder ensures accurate documentation of the specific tests included (e.g., glucose, electrolytes).

- Proper coding ensures appropriate reimbursement based on the payer's fee schedule.

- Example 2:

- A laboratory bills for genetic testing (CPT code 81408) related to hereditary cancer risk.

- The billing team verifies that the patient's diagnosis (ICD-10 code Z15.01) justifies the test.

- Incorrect coding could lead to claim denials or underpayment.

4. Conclusion:

Effective billing and coding practices are not just administrative tasks; they impact the financial viability of laboratories. By embracing best practices, fostering collaboration, and staying informed, laboratories can optimize revenue, enhance compliance, and contribute to overall business growth.

Remember, successful revenue cycle management isn't just about numbers—it's about ensuring quality care, accurate reimbursement, and sustainable growth.

Implementing Effective Billing and Coding Practices - Laboratory Revenue Cycle Optimizing Laboratory Revenue Cycle for Business Growth
 
 
 
 
Implementing Effective Billing and Coding Practices - Laboratory Revenue Cycle Optimizing Laboratory Revenue Cycle for Business Growth

5.Batch Coding Best Practices for Manufacturers and Retailers[Original Blog]
Batch coding is an essential process for manufacturers and retailers as it ensures product traceability, quality control, and compliance with regulatory requirements. However, batch coding can be a complex and time-consuming process, especially for companies that produce or sell a large volume of products. In this section, we will discuss some best practices for batch coding that can help manufacturers and retailers streamline their operations and improve their product quality and safety.

1. Standardize your coding system

One of the most important best practices for batch coding is to standardize your coding system. This means using a consistent format for all your products, which makes it easier to identify and track batches, even if they are produced in different locations or by different suppliers. A standardized coding system should include information such as the product name, batch number, production date, and expiration date. Using a consistent format also helps to avoid confusion or errors when coding products.

2. Use automated coding systems

Manual coding can be time-consuming and error-prone, especially when dealing with large volumes of products. Therefore, it is recommended to use automated coding systems such as inkjet printers or laser coding machines. These systems can print codes quickly and accurately, reducing the risk of errors and improving production efficiency. Automated coding systems also allow for more flexibility in coding, including the ability to print variable data such as lot numbers or barcodes.

3. Conduct regular quality checks

Batch coding is crucial for ensuring product traceability and quality control. However, it is only effective if the codes are accurate and legible. Therefore, it is important to conduct regular quality checks on the coding process to ensure that the codes are printed correctly and are easy to read. Regular quality checks can help to identify any issues with the coding process, such as ink smudging or poor print quality, and address them promptly.

4. Implement a system for tracking batches

Batch coding is only effective if there is a system in place to track and manage batches. This includes recording the production and expiration dates, as well as any other relevant information such as the supplier or production location. A batch tracking system can help manufacturers and retailers to quickly identify and isolate any products that may be defective or unsafe, reducing the risk of product recalls or liability issues.

5. Train your staff

Batch coding requires a high level of accuracy and attention to detail. Therefore, it is important to train your staff on the coding process and ensure that they understand the importance of accurate and consistent coding. This includes training on the coding system, quality control procedures, and batch tracking processes. Regular training can help to ensure that all staff members are aware of the coding requirements and can perform their roles effectively.

Batch coding is an essential process for manufacturers and retailers, but it can be a complex and time-consuming task. By implementing these best practices, companies can streamline their coding processes, improve product quality and safety, and ensure compliance with regulatory requirements. Standardizing the coding system, using automated coding systems, conducting regular quality checks, implementing a batch tracking system, and training staff can all help to optimize the batch coding process.

Batch Coding Best Practices for Manufacturers and Retailers - Batch Coding: Cracking the Code: Batch Coding and Expiration Dates
 
 
 
 
Batch Coding Best Practices for Manufacturers and Retailers - Batch Coding: Cracking the Code: Batch Coding and Expiration Dates

6.Introduction to C++ Coding Best Practices[Original Blog]
As you dive into the world of C++ coding, it's essential to understand the best practices that will help you write clean and efficient code. Following these practices ensures that your code is easy to read, maintain, and debug. It also helps you avoid common pitfalls that can lead to bugs and performance issues. There are many different opinions on what constitutes best practices in C++ coding. Some people prioritize performance, while others prioritize readability and maintainability. However, there are some practices that are widely agreed upon as beneficial for any C++ programmer. In this section, we will cover some of the most important best practices for C++ coding.

1. Use meaningful variable and function names: When naming variables or functions, choose names that accurately describe their purpose. Avoid using single-letter variable names or names that are too generic, as this can make the code harder to understand. For example, instead of using "i" or "j" as loop counters, use names that describe what the loop is iterating over.

2. Avoid using global variables: Global variables can cause issues with code maintainability and make it harder to debug. Instead, use local variables or pass variables as function parameters.

3. Use const whenever possible: Marking variables and functions as const helps prevent accidental changes to values. It also makes it clear to other developers that a value should not be modified.

4. Always initialize variables: Initializing variables prevents them from containing garbage values that could cause undefined behavior. For example, instead of declaring an integer without initializing it, use "int x = 0;".

5. Avoid using magic numbers: Magic numbers are hard-coded values that are not explained in the code, making it harder to understand what they represent. Instead, use named constants or enums to make the code more readable.

By following these best practices, you can write cleaner, more efficient C++ code that is easier to maintain and debug.

Introduction to C++ Coding Best Practices - C:  Coding Best Practices: Writing Clean and Efficient Code
 
 
 
 
Introduction to C++ Coding Best Practices - C: Coding Best Practices: Writing Clean and Efficient Code

7.Implementing Efficient Billing and Coding Practices[Original Blog]
Implementing efficient
1. understanding the Importance of accurate Billing and Coding:

Efficient billing and coding practices are the lifeblood of any clinical laboratory's revenue stream. These processes ensure that services rendered are appropriately documented, coded, and billed, leading to timely reimbursement. Accuracy is paramount, as errors can result in delayed payments, compliance issues, and revenue leakage. Let's explore some essential aspects:

- clear documentation: Clinical laboratories must maintain clear and comprehensive documentation for each test or procedure. This includes detailed descriptions of the services provided, patient demographics, and relevant medical history. Without accurate documentation, coders may struggle to assign the correct codes, leading to billing discrepancies.

- Coding Accuracy: Proper coding ensures that services are accurately represented. Medical coders translate clinical information into standardized codes (e.g., CPT, ICD-10) that insurers recognize. For instance:

- A lipid panel (CPT code 80061) should not be confused with a comprehensive metabolic panel (CPT code 80053).

- Specific ICD-10 codes differentiate between type 1 (E10) and type 2 (E11) diabetes.

- Up-to-Date Knowledge: Billing and coding professionals must stay informed about changes in coding guidelines, reimbursement policies, and industry updates. Regular training and access to reputable resources are essential. For instance:

- The transition from ICD-9 to ICD-10 required relearning codes and understanding new conventions.

- Navigating modifiers (e.g., -25, -59) correctly can impact reimbursement.

2. Challenges and Strategies:

implementing efficient billing and coding practices isn't without challenges. Let's explore strategies to overcome them:

- Complex Coding Scenarios: Some laboratory tests involve intricate coding scenarios. For example:

- Molecular diagnostic tests (e.g., next-generation sequencing) often require multiple codes to capture various components.

- Bundled codes (e.g., panel tests) necessitate understanding individual components and their cumulative value.

- Denials and Appeals: Denied claims can disrupt cash flow. Strategies include:

- Regularly reviewing denial patterns to identify common issues.

- Timely appeals with supporting documentation (e.g., medical necessity).

- Compliance and Audits: Laboratories face audits from payers and regulatory bodies. Strategies include:

- conducting internal audits to proactively identify compliance gaps.

- Ensuring proper use of modifiers and documentation to withstand scrutiny.

3. Examples:

Let's illustrate concepts with examples:

- Example 1 (Modifiers):

- A patient undergoes both a colonoscopy (CPT 45378) and a biopsy (CPT 88305) during the same encounter.

- Correct coding: Append modifier -59 to the biopsy code to indicate a separate procedure.

- Incorrect coding: Failing to use the modifier may result in bundling of services and reduced reimbursement.

- Example 2 (Medical Necessity):

- Ordering a comprehensive metabolic panel (CPT 80053) for a patient with uncontrolled diabetes.

- Proper documentation should justify medical necessity (e.g., monitoring glucose levels).

- Without medical necessity, the claim may be denied.

In summary, efficient billing and coding practices are essential for maximizing clinical laboratory revenue. By emphasizing accuracy, staying informed, and addressing challenges head-on, laboratories can optimize their revenue stream while ensuring compliance and quality patient care. Remember, the devil is in the details, and meticulous attention to billing and coding nuances pays off in the long run.

Implementing Efficient Billing and Coding Practices - Clinical Laboratory Revenue Stream Maximizing Clinical Laboratory Revenue: Strategies for Success
 
 
 
 
Implementing Efficient Billing and Coding Practices - Clinical Laboratory Revenue Stream Maximizing Clinical Laboratory Revenue: Strategies for Success

8.Maximizing Revenue through Effective Billing and Coding Practices[Original Blog]
Maximizing revenue through effective billing and coding practices is essential for healthcare organizations, especially in an era of complex reimbursement systems and declining reimbursements. By optimizing billing and coding processes, healthcare providers can ensure accurate and timely reimbursement, reduce denials, and maximize revenue. Here are some strategies to consider:

1. Training and education: It is crucial to provide ongoing training and education to billing and coding staff to ensure they are up-to-date with the latest coding guidelines and regulations. This helps minimize errors, improve coding accuracy, and reduce claim denials.

2. Regular auditing and feedback: Conducting regular audits of coding and billing practices can help identify areas for improvement and ensure compliance with coding guidelines. Providing feedback and performance metrics to billing and coding staff helps motivate and educate them on areas for improvement.

3. Utilizing technology: Healthcare organizations can leverage technology solutions such as electronic health records (EHRs) and computer-assisted coding (CAC) to streamline billing and coding processes. These tools automate coding and documentation, reduce errors, and improve efficiency.

4. Collaborating with payers: Healthcare organizations can work closely with payers to understand reimbursement policies and strategies for optimizing revenue. By ensuring proper documentation, coding, and claim submission, healthcare providers can minimize denials and maximize reimbursements.

By maximizing revenue through effective billing and coding practices, healthcare organizations can offset costs and maintain financial stability while delivering quality patient care.

Maximizing Revenue through Effective Billing and Coding Practices - Controlling Costs and Ensuring Quality Patient Care
 
 
 
 
Maximizing Revenue through Effective Billing and Coding Practices - Controlling Costs and Ensuring Quality Patient Care

9.Implementing Secure Coding Practices[Original Blog]
Implementing a Secure
### 1. Understanding the Importance of Secure Coding

Secure coding is the foundation of robust software development. It ensures that applications are resilient to attacks, protect user data, and maintain the trust of customers. Here are some key points to consider:

- Threat Landscape: Entrepreneurs must recognize the evolving threat landscape. Cyberattacks are rampant, and vulnerabilities in code can lead to data breaches, financial losses, and reputational damage.

- Security by Design: Secure coding should be integrated from the outset. Developers should consider security requirements during the design phase, rather than as an afterthought.

- Common Vulnerabilities: Familiarize yourself with common vulnerabilities such as SQL injection, cross-site scripting (XSS), and insecure deserialization. Understanding these pitfalls helps prevent them.

### 2. Best Practices for Secure Coding

Let's explore essential practices that entrepreneurs and developers should adopt:

- Input Validation: Validate all user inputs to prevent malicious data from compromising your application. For instance:

```python

# Python example

Def process_user_input(input_data):

If not input_data.isalnum():

Raise ValueError("Invalid input")

# Process input securely

```
- Avoid Hardcoding Secrets: Never hardcode sensitive information like API keys or passwords directly into your code. Use environment variables or secure configuration files.

- Escape Output: When displaying user-generated content (e.g., in web applications), escape special characters to prevent XSS attacks:

```html



```
### 3. Secure Coding in Practice

Let's consider a scenario: You're building an e-commerce platform. Here's how secure coding practices come into play:

- Authentication and Authorization: Implement robust authentication mechanisms. Use token-based authentication (e.g., JWT) and ensure proper authorization checks for user actions.

- Secure APIs: Validate API requests, sanitize inputs, and use HTTPS. For example:

```java

// Java example

@RequestMapping(value = "/checkout", method = RequestMethod.POST)

Public ResponseEntity processOrder(@RequestBody OrderRequest orderRequest) {

// Validate and process order securely

} ```
- Database Security: Avoid raw SQL queries. Use parameterized queries or an ORM (Object-Relational Mapping) library to prevent SQL injection:

```python

# Python example with SQLAlchemy

Query = session.query(User).filter_by(username=user_input).first()

```
Remember, secure coding is an ongoing effort. Stay informed about emerging threats, participate in security training, and collaborate with experts to build resilient software. By prioritizing secure coding practices, entrepreneurs can safeguard their startups and contribute to a safer digital ecosystem.

10.Implementing Secure Coding Practices[Original Blog]
Implementing a Secure
When it comes to implementing secure coding practices, there are several key considerations to keep in mind. By following these practices, you can enhance the security of your startup and protect it from potential exploitation. Here are some important points to consider:

1. Input Validation: It is crucial to validate all user inputs to prevent malicious data from being processed. By implementing proper input validation techniques, such as data sanitization and parameterized queries, you can mitigate the risk of code injection attacks.

2. Authentication and Authorization: Implementing robust authentication and authorization mechanisms is essential to ensure that only authorized users can access sensitive resources. This can be achieved through techniques like multi-factor authentication, role-based access control, and session management.

3. Secure Communication: Encrypting sensitive data during transmission is vital to protect it from eavesdropping and tampering. Utilizing secure communication protocols like HTTPS and SSL/TLS can help safeguard the integrity and confidentiality of data exchanged between clients and servers.

4. Error Handling: Proper error handling is crucial to prevent information leakage and potential security vulnerabilities. By providing informative error messages without revealing sensitive information, you can enhance the security of your application and make it more resilient to attacks.

5. Regular Updates and Patching: Keeping your software and libraries up to date is essential to address known vulnerabilities and security flaws. Regularly applying security patches and updates can help protect your application from exploitation by attackers.

Remember, these are just a few key aspects of implementing secure coding practices. By incorporating these practices into your development process and staying vigilant about emerging threats, you can significantly enhance the security posture of your startup.

Implementing Secure Coding Practices - Exploitation Prevention Investment Safeguarding Your Startup: The Importance of Exploitation Prevention Investment
 
 
 
 
Implementing Secure Coding Practices - Exploitation Prevention Investment Safeguarding Your Startup: The Importance of Exploitation Prevention Investment

11.Implementing Secure Coding Practices[Original Blog]
Implementing a Secure
1. Understanding the Importance of Secure Coding:

Secure coding is not an afterthought; it's a fundamental aspect of software development. Here's why:

- Threat Landscape: Cyber threats are constantly evolving. From SQL injection to cross-site scripting (XSS), attackers exploit vulnerabilities in poorly written code.

- Cost of Breaches: Data breaches can be catastrophic for organizations. The financial, reputational, and legal consequences are severe.

- Compliance: Regulatory frameworks (such as GDPR, HIPAA, and PCI DSS) mandate secure coding practices.

2. Principles of Secure Coding:

- Least Privilege: Grant minimal permissions to code components. For example, a web application should only access necessary databases or APIs.

- Input Validation: Validate user inputs rigorously. Avoid direct use of input in SQL queries or HTML rendering.

- Output Encoding: Encode output data to prevent XSS attacks. Escaping special characters is crucial.

- Defense in Depth: Layer security mechanisms (firewalls, authentication, encryption) to mitigate risks.

- Fail Securely: Handle errors gracefully. Avoid exposing sensitive information in error messages.

3. Common Vulnerabilities and Mitigations:

- SQL Injection:

- Vulnerability: Improperly sanitized user inputs in SQL queries.

- Mitigation: Use parameterized queries or prepared statements.

- Example:

```python

# Vulnerable code

Query = f"SELECT * FROM users WHERE username = '{user_input}'"

# Mitigated code

Cursor.execute("SELECT * FROM users WHERE username = %s", (user_input,))

```
- Cross-Site Scripting (XSS):

- Vulnerability: Injecting malicious scripts into web pages.

- Mitigation: Sanitize user-generated content and use Content Security Policy (CSP).

- Example:

```html




Hello, <script>var user_input = 'safe';</script>
```
- Insecure Deserialization:

- Vulnerability: Trusting serialized data without validation.

- Mitigation: Validate and sanitize deserialized data.

- Example:

```java

// Vulnerable code

Object obj = deserialize(user_input);

// Mitigated code

If (obj instanceof SafeClass) {

// Process safely

} ```
4. Secure Coding Tools and Practices:

- Static analysis tools: Use tools like SonarQube or FindBugs to identify vulnerabilities during code review.

- Security Libraries: Leverage well-tested libraries (e.g., OWASP ESAPI, bcrypt, libsodium) for cryptographic operations.

- Security Training: Regularly train developers on secure coding practices.

- Threat Modeling: Analyze potential threats early in the design phase.

Remember, secure coding is a continuous process. Stay informed about emerging threats, participate in security communities, and prioritize security alongside functionality. By doing so, you contribute to a safer digital ecosystem.

Implementing Secure Coding Practices - Security Engineering Training: How to Apply Engineering Principles and Practices to Security
 
 
 
 
Implementing Secure Coding Practices - Security Engineering Training: How to Apply Engineering Principles and Practices to Security

12.Implementing Secure Coding Practices[Original Blog]
Implementing a Secure
In this section, we'll delve into the critical topic of Implementing Secure Coding Practices. As software developers, our code is the foundation of the applications we build. Ensuring its security is paramount to safeguarding sensitive data, preventing cyberattacks, and maintaining user trust. Let's explore this multifaceted subject from various angles and provide actionable insights:

1. Threat modeling and Risk assessment:

- Insight: Before writing a single line of code, consider the potential threats your software might face. Threat modeling helps identify vulnerabilities early in the development process.

- Example: Imagine you're developing an e-commerce platform. Threats could include SQL injection, cross-site scripting (XSS), and insecure API endpoints. By assessing risks, you can prioritize security measures.

2. Input Validation and Sanitization:

- Insight: Untrusted input is a common attack vector. Validate and sanitize user inputs rigorously to prevent injection attacks.

- Example: Suppose you're building a login form. Validate email addresses, escape special characters, and use parameterized queries to prevent SQL injection.

3. Authentication and Authorization:

- Insight: Properly authenticate users and enforce access controls. Authentication verifies identity, while authorization ensures users have appropriate permissions.

- Example: Implement multi-factor authentication (MFA) and role-based access control (RBAC). Only authorized users should access sensitive features or data.

4. Secure Coding Patterns:

- Insight: Familiarize yourself with secure coding patterns. Avoid common pitfalls like hardcoding secrets or using weak encryption algorithms.

- Example: Instead of storing API keys in plain text, use environment variables or a secrets management service. Choose strong cryptographic libraries for encryption.

5. Error Handling and Logging:

- Insight: Proper error handling prevents information leakage and helps diagnose issues. Log errors securely.

- Example: Avoid displaying detailed error messages to end-users. Instead, log them internally with relevant context (e.g., stack traces) for debugging.

6. Secure Communication:

- Insight: Data transmitted over networks must be encrypted. Use HTTPS, TLS, or other secure protocols.

- Example: When making API requests, ensure endpoints use HTTPS. Validate server certificates to prevent man-in-the-middle attacks.

7. Security Testing and Code Reviews:

- Insight: Regularly test your code for vulnerabilities. Code reviews catch issues that automated tools might miss.

- Example: Conduct static analysis, dynamic scans, and penetration testing. Involve peers in code reviews to identify security gaps.

8. Third-Party Dependencies:

- Insight: Be cautious with external libraries and components. Keep them updated and verify their security posture.

- Example: If your app relies on a third-party package, monitor its security advisories. Avoid outdated or unmaintained libraries.

9. Secure Configuration Management:

- Insight: Configuration files often contain sensitive information. Protect them.

- Example: Store secrets (like database credentials) separately from the codebase. Use environment variables or a secure configuration service.

10. Continuous Learning and Adaptation:

- Insight: Security threats evolve. Stay informed about new attack vectors and best practices.

- Example: Attend security conferences, read security blogs, and participate in online communities. Adapt your practices accordingly.

Remember, secure coding isn't a one-time task; it's an ongoing commitment. By integrating security into your development process, you contribute to a safer digital landscape.

Implementing Secure Coding Practices - Technical security support: How to protect your software from cyberattacks and data breaches
 
 
 
 
Implementing Secure Coding Practices - Technical security support: How to protect your software from cyberattacks and data breaches

13.Implementing Secure Coding Practices[Original Blog]
Implementing a Secure
1. Understanding the Importance of Secure Coding:

- Developer Mindset: Secure coding begins with a mindset shift. Developers must recognize that security is not an afterthought but an integral part of the development process.

- Business Impact: Security breaches can lead to financial losses, reputational damage, and legal consequences. Organizations that prioritize secure coding gain a competitive edge.

- User Trust: Users expect their data to be handled securely. By implementing robust security practices, we build trust with our user base.

2. Common Vulnerabilities and Mitigations:

- Injection Attacks (e.g., SQL Injection):

- Problem: Unsanitized user input can lead to code execution.

- Mitigation: Use parameterized queries or prepared statements to prevent injection attacks.

- Example: Instead of concatenating user input directly into an SQL query, use placeholders like `SELECT * FROM users WHERE username = ?`.

- Cross-Site Scripting (XSS):

- Problem: Malicious scripts injected into web pages can steal user data.

- Mitigation: Sanitize user input and escape output to prevent script execution.

- Example: Use libraries like OWASP's AntiSamy to sanitize HTML input.

- Insecure Authentication and Authorization:

- Problem: Weak authentication mechanisms allow unauthorized access.

- Mitigation: Implement strong authentication (e.g., multi-factor authentication) and role-based access control.

- Example: Use OAuth or OpenID Connect for secure authentication.

3. Secure Coding Practices:

- Input Validation:

- Validate all user inputs (including form fields, API parameters, and file uploads).

- Reject invalid or unexpected input.

- Example: If expecting an email address, validate it against a regex pattern.

- Least Privilege Principle:

- Limit permissions to the minimum necessary for functionality.

- Avoid running code with elevated privileges.

- Example: Don't grant unnecessary database access to a web application.

- Secure Data Storage:

- Encrypt sensitive data at rest (e.g., using AES-256).

- Use secure key management practices.

- Example: Store API keys and passwords in environment variables or secret management tools.

- Error Handling and Logging:

- Avoid exposing sensitive information in error messages.

- Log security-related events for auditing and monitoring.

- Example: Instead of "Invalid username," provide a generic error message.

- Secure Coding Standards:

- Follow established coding guidelines (e.g., OWASP Top Ten).

- Use static analysis tools to identify security issues.

- Example: Adopt a consistent naming convention for security-related functions.

4. Code Reviews and Training:

- Peer Reviews:

- Regularly review code for security flaws.

- Encourage open discussions about security during reviews.

- Example: Conduct weekly security-focused code reviews.

- Training and Awareness:

- Train developers on secure coding practices.

- Organize workshops and share real-world examples.

- Example: Host a lunch-and-learn session on secure API design.

Remember, secure coding is a continuous process. Regularly update dependencies, stay informed about emerging threats, and adapt your practices accordingly. By weaving security into the fabric of our code, we contribute to a safer digital ecosystem.

Implementing Secure Coding Practices - Technical software security: How to Secure and Protect Technical Software
 
 
 
 
Implementing Secure Coding Practices - Technical software security: How to Secure and Protect Technical Software

14.Secure coding practices for junior developers[Original Blog]
As a junior developer, it's important to understand the significance of secure coding practices. In today's digital world, where cyberattacks are becoming more prevalent, it's essential to ensure that the code you write is secure and free from vulnerabilities. Failure to do so can result in serious consequences, such as data breaches, financial loss, and reputational damage.

From a business perspective, secure coding practices are crucial because they can help avoid costly mistakes later on. The cost of fixing a vulnerability in production is far higher than fixing it during the development phase. Additionally, secure coding practices can improve the quality of the code, reduce the risk of errors and bugs, and increase the overall efficiency of the development process.

From a user's perspective, secure coding practices are equally important. Users trust developers to keep their personal and sensitive information safe. If the code is not secure, users' data can be compromised, leading to identity theft, financial fraud, and other cybercrimes.

To ensure that you are following secure coding practices, here are some tips to keep in mind:

1. Use a secure development framework: Secure development frameworks, such as the Open Web Application Security Project (OWASP), can help you identify and mitigate common security vulnerabilities. These frameworks provide a set of guidelines and best practices that you can follow to ensure that your code is secure.

2. Validate user input: One of the most common ways that hackers exploit vulnerabilities is by injecting malicious code through user input fields. To prevent this, always validate user input, sanitize data, and use parameterized queries when interacting with databases.

3. Use encryption: Encryption is an essential component of secure coding practices. Always use encryption to protect sensitive data, such as passwords, credit card numbers, and other personal information.

4. Keep your dependencies up to date: Third-party libraries and frameworks can introduce vulnerabilities into your code. Always keep your dependencies up to date and only use trusted sources.

5. Use automated tools: There are many automated tools available that can help you identify security vulnerabilities in your code. Use these tools regularly to ensure that your code is free from vulnerabilities.

By following these tips, you can ensure that your code is secure and free from vulnerabilities. Remember, secure coding practices are not optional; they are essential for the safety and security of users and businesses alike.

Secure coding practices for junior developers - Cybersecurity for Junior Developers: A Beginner's Guide
 
 
 
 
Secure coding practices for junior developers - Cybersecurity for Junior Developers: A Beginner's Guide

15.Secure Coding Practices[Original Blog]
1. The Developer's Lens: Writing Robust Code

- Input Validation: Begin by validating all user inputs. Malicious actors often exploit poorly validated inputs to inject code or trigger unexpected behavior. For instance, consider a web application that accepts user input for a search query. If the input isn't sanitized, an attacker could inject SQL commands and compromise the database.

- Avoid Hardcoding Secrets: Developers should never hardcode sensitive information like API keys, passwords, or cryptographic keys directly into the source code. Instead, use environment variables or secure configuration files.

- Escape Output: When displaying user-generated content (e.g., comments on a blog), escape special characters to prevent cross-site scripting (XSS) attacks. For example, convert `

Join our community on Social Media

Join our +28K followers of investors, mentors, and entrepreneurs!

 
 
 
 
About Us

FasterCapital is a global venture builder and online incubator dedicated to co-funding and co-founding innovative startups. Established in 2014, we are now #1 venture builder in terms of number of startups that we have helped, money invested and money raised.

We have supported over 734 startups in raising more than $2.2 billion, while directly investing over $696 million in 288 companies. Our comprehensive support system includes a worldwide network of mentors, investors, and strategic partners, allowing us to transform ideas into scalable, market-ready businesses.

FasterCapital operates as FasterCapital LLC-FZ, a duly registered entity in Dubai. Our registration number is 2416362.

Contact Us

 Address: Grandstand, 0612, 6th floor, Meydan Freezone, Meydan Road, Nad Al Sheba, Dubai
 Email: contact@fastercapital.com
 Phone: +1 (512) 400-0256
Programs

Raise Capital
Mega Financing
Tech Cofounder
Grow your Startup
Idea to Product
Startup Visa
Join us

Entrepreneur
Investor
Partner
Regional Partner
Mentor
Community

Our Team
Entrepreneurs
Investors
Partners
Regional Partners
Representatives
Mentors
Media

Testimonials
Success Stories
News
Investments
Press
References
Videos
LearnHub

About LearnHub
Content Corner
Keywords
Topics
Questions
Infographics
Blogs
FasterCapital logo
 
 
 
 
© Copyright 2024. All Rights Reserved.

Beta
0 / 10
used queries
1
Daily Logo
Start reading - Free forever
Home
arrow-down
Blog
arrow-down
Get into tech
10 Secure Coding Best Practices for Developers [2024]
Jul 23, 2024
10 Secure Coding Best Practices for Developers [2024]
🎯

Key secure coding practices for developers in 2024 and important security trends. Learn about input validation, output encoding, authentication, session management, access control, and more.

Here's a quick overview of the top 10 secure coding practices for developers in 2024:
Input validation
Output encoding
Authentication and password management
Session management
Access control
Cryptographic practices
Error handling and logging
Data protection
Communication security
Code review and testing
These practices help prevent common security flaws like SQL injection, cross-site scripting, and data breaches. They're essential for building robust, secure software systems in today's threat landscape. Key security trends in 2024 include:
Trend	Description
Automated testing	Using tools to find security issues
Shift left security	Adding security early in development
Microservices	Building apps as small, independent services
Container security	Protecting containerized apps
Zero-trust	Verifying every access request
DevSecOps	Combining development, security, and operations
API security	Protecting application interfaces
AI/ML in security	Using AI for threat detection
By following these practices and staying aware of new trends, you can significantly improve your code's security and protect against evolving cyber threats.
Related video from YouTube

Basics of secure coding
Secure coding is key for making software safe. Let's look at what it means, why it's needed, and common security issues.
Secure coding explained
Secure coding means writing code that's hard to hack. It involves:
Following coding rules
Using strong coding methods
Applying safety practices while making software
This helps protect software from attacks that could harm data or system use.
Why developers need secure coding
Developers use secure coding to:
Reason	Explanation
Stop breaches	Prevent unauthorized access to systems
Guard data	Keep sensitive information safe
Keep user trust	Ensure users feel safe using the software
As hacks increase, secure coding has become a must in software development. It helps:
Lower security risks
Meet legal rules
Build more reliable software
Common security flaws and their effects
Here are some common security flaws and their impacts:
Flaw	Description	Effect
SQL Injection	Attackers insert harmful code into database queries	Can access and change sensitive data
Cross-Site Scripting (XSS)	Malicious scripts are injected into web pages	Can steal user login info and take over sessions
Cross-Site Request Forgery (CSRF)	Tricks users into performing unwanted actions	Can lead to unauthorized transactions or data changes
1. Input validation
Why input validation matters
Input validation helps stop attacks like SQL injection and cross-site scripting (XSS). Without it, hackers can insert bad code, leading to:
Unauthorized access
Data breaches
System problems
Checking input makes sure only good data gets in, reducing security risks.
How to validate input effectively
Follow these steps to check input well:
Step	Description
Set clear rules	Define what good input looks like (format, type, length)
Use whitelisting	Allow only specific, expected characters or patterns
Check on the server	Don't rely only on client-side checks
Use built-in tools	Apply existing functions for input validation
Input validation mistakes to avoid
Don't make these common errors when checking input:
Mistake	Why it's bad
Not checking at all	Leaves your app open to attacks
Only checking on the client	Can be bypassed easily
Using blacklisting	Often misses some bad inputs
Ignoring file uploads	Can let in malware or other threats
2. Output encoding
Why output encoding is needed
Output encoding helps stop cross-site scripting (XSS) attacks in web development. These attacks happen when bad code gets into a web page and can:
Steal user data
Change content
Do things without user permission
Output encoding turns risky characters into safe ones. This makes sure user data shows up correctly without changes. OWASP and other groups say it's important to do this to keep data safe and follow security rules.
How to encode output correctly
To encode output well:
Step	Description
Use the right encoding	Different places need different encoding (HTML vs JavaScript)
Use trusted tools	OWASP ESAPI has functions for many types of encoding
Do it on the server	Don't rely on the user's browser for encoding
Use standard methods	Stick to tested ways of encoding for each output type
Set character sets	Always say which character set you're using (like UTF-8)
Stopping XSS attacks
Output encoding stops XSS attacks by making sure the browser doesn't run user data as code. Here's how it works:
Action	Result
Change special characters	Turns them into safe HTML entities
Make data plain text	Browser shows it as text, not code
Prevent script running	Stops bad scripts from working
This keeps users safe from:
Cookie theft
Session hijacking
Unwanted redirects
3. Authentication and password management
Building strong authentication systems
A good authentication system checks who users are and only lets the right people in. Using more than one way to check (multi-factor authentication or MFA) makes it even safer. Here are some ways to do MFA:
Type	Examples
Knowledge	Passwords, PINs
Possession	OTP tokens, smart cards
Biometrics	Fingerprints, face scans
Location	IP address, GPS
Behavior	Typing patterns, mouse use
How to store and manage passwords
Keeping passwords safe is key. Here's how to do it:
Method	Description
Hash and salt	Mix passwords with extra data before storing
Use a pepper	Add a secret value for extra protection
Secure storage	Keep passwords in special, locked-down places
Password manager	Use a tool to make and remember strong passwords
Using multi-factor authentication
MFA adds extra steps to log in, making it harder for bad actors to get in. Some MFA methods are:
Method	How it works
One-Time Password	Get a code on your phone or email
Smart Card	Use a special card with a PIN
Biometrics	Scan your finger or face
U2F Token	Plug in a special device and enter a PIN
4. Session management
How to handle sessions securely
Keeping user sessions safe stops others from getting into private data. Here's how to do it well:
Best Practice	Description
Use HTTPS	Encrypt session data
Create safe session IDs	Stop session fixation attacks
Set timeouts	End sessions after a set time
Store sessions safely	Use secure cookies or server storage
Stopping session attacks
Session attacks can harm your app's safety. Here's how to stop them:
Attack Type	How to Prevent It
Session Hijacking	Use HTTPS, make safe session IDs, set timeouts
Session Fixation	Make new session ID after login, use safe ID creation
Setting up session timeouts
Timeouts help keep data safe. Here's how to set them up:
Timeout Type	What It Does
Regular Timeout	Ends session after set time
Idle Timeout	Ends session if user is inactive
Sliding Expiration	Extends session if user is active
Pick timeouts that fit your app's needs. This helps keep user data safe without making things hard for users.

5. Access control
Using the least privilege principle
The least privilege principle means giving users only the access they need to do their job. This helps keep systems safe by:
Limiting what hackers can do if they break in
Reducing mistakes that could harm the system
For example, if someone only needs to add data to a database, don't give them full access to everything. This way, if their account is hacked, the damage is limited.
Setting up role-based access control
Role-based access control (RBAC) gives users permissions based on their job. It's a simple way to manage who can do what in a system. To set up RBAC:
List all the jobs in your company
Decide what each job needs to access
Give users the right role for their job
For example:
Role	Access
Web developer	Can edit website files
Database admin	Can manage databases
HR staff	Can view employee records
Reviewing access rights regularly
Check who has access to what in your system often. This helps:
Remove access for people who don't need it anymore
Find possible security problems
Follow rules and laws about data protection
Make a schedule to review access rights. This keeps your system safe and follows the rules.
Review task	How often
Check user roles	Every 3 months
Remove old accounts	Every month
Update job changes	When they happen
6. Cryptographic practices
Picking the right cryptographic algorithms
When choosing cryptographic algorithms:
Do	Don't
Use well-known algorithms (AES, SHA-256)	Make your own algorithms
Pick algorithms tested by experts	Use new or untested methods
Managing cryptographic keys
Good key management is key to safe cryptography:
Task	How to do it
Make keys	Use a safe random number maker
Store keys	Keep in special hardware (HSM or TPM)
Change keys	Replace keys often
Common cryptography mistakes
Avoid these errors when using cryptography:
Mistake	Why it's bad
Weak or hardcoded keys	Easy for hackers to guess or find
Not using safe protocols (like TLS)	Data can be seen or changed in transit
Not checking before decrypting	Can lead to security holes
Using old algorithms or tools	May have known security flaws
7. Error handling and logging
How to handle errors securely
When dealing with errors, it's important to keep things safe. Here's what to do:
Show users a simple error message
Don't give away secret information
Keep detailed error info hidden
Here's an example:
try {
  // Code that might cause problems
} catch (error) {
  console.error("Something went wrong. Please try again.");
}
This tells users there's a problem without sharing too much.
Setting up good logging
Logging helps find and fix issues. Here's how to do it right:
Do this	Why it matters
Log important events	Tracks key actions
Limit who can see logs	Keeps info safe
Store logs securely	Protects sensitive data
Check logs often	Spots potential problems
Keeping data safe in errors and logs
It's key to stop sensitive info from leaking. Here's how:
Action	Purpose
Use general error messages	Hides system details
Don't log private data	Protects user information
Encrypt logs	Adds extra security
Control log access	Limits who can see info
8. Data protection
Keeping data safe is a key part of secure coding. It means guarding important information from theft or misuse. Let's look at how to protect data, collect only what's needed, and follow the rules.
Protecting stored and sent data
To keep data safe when it's stored or sent:
Method	How it works
Encryption	Scrambles data so only those with the key can read it
Access control	Limits who can see or use data
Data masking	Hides parts of sensitive info, like credit card numbers
Collecting only needed data
Only gather the data you really need:
Define why you're collecting data
Limit what users can input (e.g., use checkboxes instead of open text)
Use smart tools to remove extra data before saving it
Following data protection rules
To stay within the law:
Step	What to do
Map your data	Know what data you have and where it is
Set time limits	Decide how long to keep data and delete it when done
Ask for permission	Get users to agree before collecting their info
9. Communication security
Using secure communication protocols
To keep online talks safe, use these protocols:
Protocol	What it does
HTTPS	Adds safety to web browsing
TLS	Keeps data safe as it moves
HTTPS makes web browsing safer. It hides data so others can't see or change it. TLS is newer and better than SSL. It keeps data safe from start to finish.
Checking and pinning certificates
Certificates show a website is real. But they need to be checked to stop attacks. Here's how to use certificates safely:
Method	How it works
Certificate transparency	Keeps a public list of all certificates
Certificate pinning	Links a certificate to a specific website
These methods help stop fake certificates and keep your data safe.
Stopping man-in-the-middle attacks
Man-in-the-middle attacks happen when someone gets between you and the website you're talking to. To stop these attacks:
Use safe talk protocols
Check and pin certificates
Add more safety steps
Here are some ways to keep your online talks safe:
Method	What it does
Strong encryption	Hides data so others can't read it
VPNs	Make a safe space for private info
Force HTTPS	Always use the safer way to browse
Update often	Keep your safety tools up to date
10. Code review and testing
Code review and testing help find and fix security issues in software. They make sure the code is strong and works well.
Why regular code reviews matter
Code reviews help catch security problems early. Here's what they do:
Benefit	Description
Find issues	Spot security flaws before they cause trouble
Better code	Reduce mistakes and make code stronger
Share knowledge	Team members learn from each other
Follow rules	Make sure code meets standards
Using automated security testing
Automated tools can find security issues quickly. They work while you code, giving fast feedback. Here are some tools:
Tool	What it does
OWASP ZAP	Checks web apps for security problems
Burp Suite	Tests web apps for many security issues
SonarQube	Looks at code and suggests fixes
Penetration testing and finding vulnerabilities
Penetration testing acts like a fake attack on your system. It helps:
Find weak spots in security
Test how well your defenses work
Show ways to make security better
You can do this by hand or with tools like Metasploit or Nessus. It's good to do this often to keep your system safe.
Conclusion
Summary of 10 secure coding practices
We've looked at 10 key ways to code safely in 2024:
Practice	What it does
Input validation	Checks data before using it
Output encoding	Makes sure output is safe to show
Authentication	Confirms who users are
Session management	Keeps user sessions safe
Access control	Limits who can do what
Cryptography	Hides and protects data
Error handling	Deals with problems safely
Data protection	Keeps information safe
Communication security	Makes online talks private
Code review and testing	Finds and fixes issues
By using these methods, coders can make their work much safer.
Keeping up with new security threats
New dangers pop up all the time in computer safety. Coders need to:
Learn about new threats
Stay up-to-date with safety news
Keep their skills fresh
This helps them protect their work from the latest attacks.
Putting safety first when coding
It's best to think about safety from the start when making software. This means:
Planning for safety before coding
Checking for safety issues while coding
Testing for safety after coding
Related posts
Most Secure Backend Framework: A Developer's Guide
Execute Code Online: Best Practices
Backend Development Trends in 2024
10 Best Practices for Tracking Third-Party Components in Software
Author
Nimrod Kramer
Nimrod Kramer
@NimrodKramer
Related tags on daily.dev
toc
Table of contents
Related video from YouTube
Basics of secure coding
Secure coding explained
Why developers need secure coding
Common security flaws and their effects
1. Input validation
Why input validation matters
How to validate input effectively
Input validation mistakes to avoid
2. Output encoding
Why output encoding is needed
How to encode output correctly
Stopping XSS attacks
3. Authentication and password management
Building strong authentication systems
How to store and manage passwords
Using multi-factor authentication
4. Session management
How to handle sessions securely
Stopping session attacks
Setting up session timeouts
5. Access control
Using the least privilege principle
Setting up role-based access control
Reviewing access rights regularly
6. Cryptographic practices
Picking the right cryptographic algorithms
Managing cryptographic keys
Common cryptography mistakes
7. Error handling and logging
How to handle errors securely
Setting up good logging
Keeping data safe in errors and logs
8. Data protection
Protecting stored and sent data
Collecting only needed data
Following data protection rules
9. Communication security
Using secure communication protocols
Checking and pinning certificates
Stopping man-in-the-middle attacks
10. Code review and testing
Why regular code reviews matter
Using automated security testing
Penetration testing and finding vulnerabilities
Conclusion
Summary of 10 secure coding practices
Keeping up with new security threats
Putting safety first when coding
Related posts
Read more on daily.dev
open link icon
daily.dev platform
Why not level up your reading with daily.dev?
Stay up-to-date with the latest developer news every time you open a new tab.
Start reading - Free forever
Why not level up your reading with daily.dev?
Stay up-to-date with the latest developer news every time you open a new tab.
browsers logos
Start reading - Free forever
Read more
Mediator Design Pattern Explained
Get into tech
Mediator Design Pattern Explained
Discover the Mediator Design Pattern, its benefits, and when to use it for cleaner, maintainable code in complex systems.
Nimrod Kramer
Nimrod Kramer
October 28, 2024
VSCode Extensions Every Developer Needs
Get into tech
VSCode Extensions Every Developer Needs
Discover essential VSCode extensions for developers to enhance productivity, improve code quality, streamline project management, and collaborate effectively. Dive into tools like Prettier, ESLint, GitHub Copilot, Live Share, and more.
Nimrod Kramer
Nimrod Kramer
April 3, 2024
How to do brand marketing for developers
Get into tech
How to do brand marketing for developers
Learn how to build a strong developer brand by showcasing your skills, engaging with communities, and sharing valuable content.
Nimrod Kramer
Nimrod Kramer
November 25, 2024
See more on daily.dev
×
We value your privacy
This site uses cookies to improve your experience. By continuing to use our site, you accept our use of cookies, Privacy Policy, and Terms of Service.

Learn more and customize
Accept
daily.dev logo
daily.dev is a professional network for developers to learn, collaborate, and grow together.
Start reading
Twitter
Twitter
GitHub
Instagram
Instagram
Product
Chrome extension
Edge add-on
Web version
Mobile
Changelog
Status
Community
Docs
Open source
Feature requests
Online events
Swag store
Company
Careers
Blog
Advertise
Brand book
About us
Contact
© 2025 Daily Dev Ltd.
Terms
Privacy
Guidelines
Working remotely wherever we're happiest
🇮🇱 🇮🇹 🇵🇭 🇳🇱 🇬🇧 🇭🇷 🇱🇹 🇦🇺 🇵🇱 🇳🇴 🇦🇱 🇵🇹
Software Bay
Development
Workshops
Careers
8 Coding best practices and tips
HomeResourcesBlog & Podcast8 Coding best practices and tips
Share
While learning programming and problem-solving, we also, as in many other industries, learn good practices related to our work. This was probably the same in your case. And although you probably know them by heart, let's make an appointment - who doesn’t forget about them sometimes in sheer of tasks and the upcoming deadlines? So, we have prepared 7 best tips for good programming practice that you can refer to from time to time as a reminder. Let’s start!

8 Coding best practices and tips

1. Be DRY or DIE

What does it actually mean? DRY is exactly “Don’t Repeat Yourself”, while DIE - Duplication Is Evil. In both cases, it is about the lack of repetition in the code - if a given part of it is repetitive, automate it! After all, that's what apps are made for - to simplify certain activities. So, why would we waste the time copying and pasting the same fragment of code over and over? Simply summarize them in a procedure or class with specific parameters.

Be DRY and stay safe!

2. Test Driven Development & Bahaviour Driven Development

The pace of life makes us try to improve various ongoing processes and act faster and faster. Unfortunately, often, instead of planning, how to perform tasks more efficiently and precisely, we omit some elements that seem to be less important to us. The same happens in the case of coding and insufficient testing of the created product, due to short lead times. But let's get one thing clear - so what if you write code quickly if it doesn't work properly?

Test Driven Development and Behaviour Driven Development , i.e. in abbreviations TDD and BDD are respectively practices , that require good code design, before the start of the operation and testing its actual behaviour. Acting in this way increases the verifiability of the code and facilitates the creation of accurate documentation.

Insufficient attention, paid to testing , can significantly extend the development process . Adjustments will have to be made over time, which you will either make individually or you will need support in doing so. However, a customer who receives such a product will not be satisfied. As a result, either he will never come back to you, or he will come back only with complaints.

3. Text length matters

Did you notice that long, compact blocks of text seem harder to read from the start and are more reluctant to read than well-formatted ones? The same is true for code . When writing it, try to keep it in an organized, readable form. It is said, that the best art the short lines, with a length up to max. 80 characters.

Just like in articles or books, also make sure that the paragraphs, in this case - sections, are properly divided. Each method or function should have its own block, which will allow you or the person who will work on it at a later time to find yourself in the code .

4. Avoid hard coding

... except for permanent elements, of course. This tip mainly concerns information connected with the configuration, such as passwords, which, for security reasons, should be easy to modify.

5. Single Source of Truth

SSOT is the practice of storing the final version of application data in one place. Specific references to detailed information are made only by adding the corresponding links. It is a principle adapted not only for the field of application development , but also for the creation of documents in other departments of the organization. That confirms its functionality and convenience.

6. Use descriptive names

Returning to the actions we take to reduce the time spent on various activities, let's also look at describing the names of the variables used. Ok, short names look good and more synthetic, but do you always remember what they exactly meant?

Until a few years ago, short names were required, among other things, due to the construction of interfaces. Today, nothing stands in the way of describing the created variables in an extensive and accurate manner. A moment more devoted to describing in detail while creating, is a lot of time saved in the future by you, or by others, on guessing "what the author meant".

7. Version control

All parts of a project that you create, should be under constant version control. Why? Thanks to the use of such a mechanism, cooperation between the involved devs will be facilitated. They will be able to operate on the same sets of files, as well as follow subsequent, updated versions of the code . In this area, your needs can be met by tools such as Git and GitHub, allowing not only the above-mentioned activities, but also regular saving of subsequent versions and creating backups.

Remember, you never know when a glitch will happen to you, and regular recording of your work progress can save you a lot of stress!

8. Maintain consistency

This rule applies to uniform naming, selected functions, and the order of structures. Of course, testing new solutions may turn out to be a bull's eye, but try not to overdo it with their number when working on one project. In this way determine the patterns that you will use or propose to create the same one for the entire team, with which you work. Your code will be more readable, and as a result, it will be easier for you to communicate in terms of advice or product development , and you will easily find any errors that have arisen.

So how many of them do you remember in your daily work?

.
Related Posts
A huge transformation to React Native in Coinbase
A huge transformation to React Native in Coinbase
Read More 
7 Industries, which should be supported by applications
7 Industries, which should be supported by applications
Read More 
Looking for React or React Native talents?
Need help? Our team will help you straight away.

hello@sbay.io
Software Bay
Software Bay sp. z o.o.
ul. Świętokrzyska 25 / 127
80-180 Gdańsk
VAT UE: PL5833421188
Phone: +48 605-922-302

Company
Home
Careers
Hire us
Resources
Blog
Terms
Contact
Sitemap.xml
Services
All Services
React Native Development
React Development
Code Consulting
Performance Audit
Refactoring
Migration To React Native
Workshops
All Workshops
React Basics
React Native Basics
Advanced React Architecture
© Software Bay.

2025
Beta
0 / 10
used queries
1
Appsero
Features
Integrations
Pricing
Blog
Contact
Docs
Login Get Started
best coding practices
February 24, 2022
AdritaAdrita
20 Min Read
0
7 Best Coding Practices for Developers to Follow
Programming has become an incredibly impactful career in the job market nowadays. But, for being an expert programmer and holding this position you have to be more tactical. 

In any specific software-based project, programmers had to do the pillar works. Therefore, they had to be creative and perseverant. You can’t find any shortcuts in this work. 

But, what if there was a way to make coding less hampering? Well, you can use best coding practices to ease your working process. Take these practices as a list of side tasks that you will do while coding. 

Let’s get started. 

Table of Content-

What is Coding Standard?
Why are Standard Coding Practices Better than Non-Standard Coding Practices? 
7 Best Coding Practices for Developers
FAQs on Coding Practices
What Is the Ideal Coding Standard? 
best coding practices
In simple terms, a set of specific rules or practices to perfectly write lines of code can be described as coding standards.” 

Moreover, coding standards work as a software uniform format for engineers to write perfect and correct functional code. 

Coding standards should always have these qualities, 

Should make the writing process easy
Error-free codes
Increase the readability of code
Make code more reusable
Should increase developer efficiency and generate reliable outcomes 
Make the debugging process faster
Many companies had their own specific coding standards for their employee developers. Do you know that Google developers have to be experts in abstract mathematics? In interviews, Google can ask any tricky mathematics question to the applicants. 

Moreover, developers have to be experts in at least one programming language and have complete mastery over it. They prioritize better quality in one language than bad quality in many. Apart from that, they should learn what are the end-to-end good practices for easy smooth deployment.

Why is Standard Coding Practices Better Than Non-standard Coding Practices? 
There are good standards of coding, and there are bad coding practices. Here are some poor coding practice examples, 

Jumbling source files. 
Using one coding rule over another. 
Not using header comments in methods.
Using “Hungariennotion” in Java.  
Adding typos in code. 
Mistake in formatting code. 
IDE “code completion” errors.
Hard code for passwords. 
Here is a comparison of standard and inadequate coding, 

Standard 	Inadequate
Makes your process easier to complete 	Makes the writing process harder
The usage of short functions is a standard coding practice 	The usage of long functions is a bad coding practice 
Standard coding will not be repetitive 	However, bad coding practice doesn’t support the DRY (Don’t Repeat Yourself) principle 
Standard coding remains always organized. 	Sometimes bad coding arrays may turn into unorganized lines 
Both machine and human-understandable 	But, bad coding is not human-understandable, which makes it harder to debug 
Capitalization and punctuation will always be faultless in standard coding 	In bad coding, punctuation marks are placed incorrectly. 
Bad coding practices create hindrances in everything, and ultimately, code is full of bugs. However, non-standard coding practices are not always bad. In a unique issue, bad coding can be used to find a suitable solution. 

Humans are not faultless, and continuous writing will eventually lead to bad coding. In those cases, taking a break might help. 

7 Best Coding Practices for Developers
best coding practices
Programming is not an easy job, so any practice might not reduce your work dramatically but it will help you reach your desired objective faster. Especially assists to become an expert WordPress developer.

This article is represented by many veteran programmers and some of our own expert employees. So, don’t worry about the authenticity. 

1. Follow the current industry methods 
Different projects require a specific set of coding practices, and therefore it’s best to stick with that standard. Programming for a gaming company will be completely distinct from an automobile or operating system company. If the company launches different branches within the same name, then it may have similarities. 

For example, C is the priority language for operating systems development. Even though C++ is a more advanced version of C, developers use C standards to develop OS. So, knowing C++ standards only might not help in an operating system development environment. 

Mastering initiative-specific practices are the key to developing many crucial coding skills. Moreover, you can reach your desired results faster and help your fellow programmers help more sufficiently. The best part is you don’t even have to learn other programming languages if your job doesn’t require it. 

Moreover, your code will be satisfactory for end-users and have all the specific business requirements. To make your job polished have some knowledge of essential developer tools.

2. Write visible clear code 
Any fool can write code that a computer can understand. Good programmers write code that humans can understand.

– Martin Fowler
One of the most crucial parts of coding is making it simple and understandable to you and your teammates. Writing a simple version of a complex code is almost like an achievement because both standards should lead you to the same result. 

Here are some ways to keep your code simple, which should help you take less time and grant more space, 

Make your vertical lines short. Vertically long lines are harder to read, but horizontally long line blocks are easier to read. 
Write fewer lines.   
Always focus on naming every convention. 
Instead of segmenting code blocks, make them paragraphs. 
Maintain enough indentations at the beginning and at the end of your code. These indentions will specify and mark your code clearly. 
Stop using multiple functions because a single function completing a single task is less complex. 
It’s best not to be repetitive when writing code. However, you can Automate redundant assignments whenever required. 
Try to make your nesting levels as few as possible because too many nesting levels make the code complicated. 
There are many unique words and functions that you should capitalize and distinguish from table and column titles.
These practices should make your coding clearly understandable and errorless. 

Header Standardisation for Specific Modules 
Your different coding headers should maintain a similar format. Consider these points while you write your headers, 

The name of the module.
Date. 
Your name. 
Any change record. 
A short summary of the module’s functionality.
Module variables. 
3. Put comments in your code
code editor tools
In group projects, it’s easy to make any mistake or not be an expert in a precise area. Moreover, your point of view about a specific coding will not be the same as others. One interesting fact is, after sometime later, the developer himself may not have the same logic about programming. 

Commenting in code will make this logic difference an advantage in a group project. When you put comments in a code, you create an awareness zone for others who work later in that project. 

Your comment should explain the code snippets. Comments are actually small messages to inform other developers who will check the same project later. 

Sometimes a comment can save an entire project from being destroyed. Moreover, code comments play a vital role for beginner programmers. They can learn and help to teach them any logic behind a code. 

So, make sure to prioritize commenting. 

Read More: Reduce WordPress Spam Commenting

4. Request a review or test run of your code after you are done
best coding practices
It’s normal for a human to make mistakes and make them later. However, doing a debugging process on your own after a failed attempt sometimes may not be 100% accurate 

That’s why you may have mistakenly gone through the same mistake over and over again. However, that doesn’t mean that someone else will not see the same mistakes. So, in programming, it’s best to show someone your code, and they might find that one annoying mistake you’re repeating. 

When your code is reviewed by a new person they are actually not only finding a problem but also suggesting an edit. This review may prevent a significant issue from happening in the future. 

Peer review is considered a must for big projects where hundreds of people are working. One slight mistake in the code can destroy the entire project and put the work in jeopardy. Later, you have to put more effort, which can entirely be solved by someone else. In this case, you can rely on software testing reports from QA Team.

5. Prioritize daily backups
According to TechRepublic, 80% of developers code in Linux, and ranked second is Windows operating system (77%). The problem with an operating system is that it sometimes crashes. 

Moreover, that’s not the only issue you might have while coding. We are talking about device malfunction, dead battery, and internal hardware damage. Once one of the events occurs, you will lose all your work and go through hell all over again. 

Back up your current working progression every time after a modification. Make it a habit. You can choose a version control mechanism like TFS, SVN, etc. 

However, there is another option you can try that will back up your progress automatically. Yes, you guessed right, cloud-based code editors are becoming pretty popular these days. They offer- 

Data safety.
Automatic backups.  
Team management. 
No setup is needed. 
Connect with expert developers. 
It’s more like a social media type of thing for only programmers. You can check out some pretty popular platforms like GitHub, CodeSandbox, Raplit, AWS cloud9, and JetBrains. 

6. Name your conventions 
In the “Write Visible Clear Code” section, we already told you to name every convention in your specific programming language. Here are some reasons why you should do it. 

Convention Name	Used Languages	Example
Snake Case: 2 words are separated with an underscore  	C++, Erlang, Pearl, PHP, Ruby, Python, Ocaml, 	crazy_dog
Camel Case: The separation of words is symbolized with a capital word (no capital letter in the starting word) 	C, C++, Visual Basic(VB), JavaScript 	crazyDog 
Pascal Case: The separation of words is symbolized with a capital word (both words starting the alphabet) 	Pascal programming language 	CrazyDog 
Hungarian Notation: It suggests the intention behind the name (It’s a bit complex to understand this naming style) 	C++ and Java 	myCrazyDog   //I called my dog “crazy”  
amTallGiraffe  //amazon’s giraffe is “tall” 
Source – Wikipedia 
A) Readability 
Understanding a code’s purpose in less time is readability. Naming conventions will make the code string easier for other developers to understand.

They will figure out the purpose faster and make necessary decisions more frequently. On average, a developer reads more code than writes. 

B) Faster process time 
Naming any code element like a variable, method, or field will sort it out. Later, you don’t have to return to these fields and fix them all over again. All you need is to figure out a good name. 

C) Helps new members 
Naming precisely in code will help a new member cope faster with a different programming language. Why? Because every programming language uses a specific style for naming conventions. And, naming conventions weirdly can inform an experienced developer to halt the process and suggest a fix. 

7. Debugging 
Many programmers think debugging is not actually part of the coding process, and therefore they don’t pay heed to them. They are the ones who suffer from debugging issues more often than other developers. 

Effective debugging makes code readable to others and creates a final finishing project. Humans always make mistakes, that’s why there is no code in existence that didn’t go through the debugging process. 

When writing your code, you will always find yourself solving many problems. Imagine how hard the problem-solving will be without any actual idea of how to proceed. 

Any code debugging process starts with initial steps. Here are quick tips you can apply for your debugging process, 

Have a clear intention behind your code’s purpose. 
Run multiple tests until you find the problem. 
Create a definition for the bug and write details about it. 
You can take a snapshot of the bug. 
Use a debugging tool.
Finally, ask a senior developer. 
Try out every possible solution to the current problem until you fix it. In the debugging process, having strong willpower is the most important. 

FAQs Related to Best Coding Practices
Question: What is the term “indentation” in coding? 
Answer: Indention is the vertical empty space after every line of code. In most programming languages, indentions are not significant and only increase readability. However, the same doesn’t apply to Python. In Python, indentions mark blocks of code.  

Question: What are the 3 essential qualities of writing code? 
Answer: These 3 qualities are a must for every level developer when writing code, 
– Clear design
– Clear purpose
– Clear code 

Question: What is CODER? 
Answer: CODER is the short form of, 
C – Collect
O – Organise
D – Draft 
E – Editing
R – Revise 
In a simplistic thought, CODER is the obtaining process of excellent writing skills. 

Question: How to recognize good code? 
Answer: There are 3 categories that indicate good code, 
– Human-understandable. 
– The code’s intentions are clear to an outside programmer. 
– Reading the code takes less time than writing the code. 

Question: How much do programmers make per hour? 
Answer: A software developer in America earns $35 an hour and over $70,000 yearly. To have a wider view click on- Developers Early wages.

Practice Clean Coding to Boost Your Software Development and Testing Skill
Take programming as a game, but it’s not a single-player game. It’s more like a team game, where you can gain extra gaming valuables if you take help from your friends. 

Sharpening your skills by adopting the above practices will make you feel like a game when you are doing it with developers. You will become a pro in less than your expected time and hold your skills almost forever. 

In the world of code, writing visibly clear and understandable code for others is an essential achievement for any programmer. 

If you are new to coding, here is a small tip. You can start your journey from coding Bootcamp, Udemy, or Coursera. Take online classes, meet with other developers, and learn from veteran programmers. 

If you have any other queries or anything to add about best coding practices, then do let us know in the comments below.  

Subscribe To Appsero To Enjoy Insightful Developers-Centric Content➜
Best Coding PracticesCoding Best Practice for DevelopersReasons to maintain coding standardwhat is coding standard
{ Tips & Tricks }
Adrita
About Adrita
Adrita is a WordPress Blogger & Digital Marketer. Enthusiastic about producing content on challenging subjects. Besides, she loves to sing classical songs, watch movies, travel and read love stories. Apart from all of these, she fancies playing with her pet dog “Judy” & "Deany".

Subscribe To Our Newsletter
Don’t miss any updates of our new templates and extensions
and all the astonishing offers we bring for you.

First Name *
Enter first name
Email *
Enter email
Submit
Leave a Reply
Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *

Comment

Name *

Email *


This site uses Akismet to reduce spam. Learn how your comment data is processed.

appsero

Analytics, Software Licensing, Automatic Updates, Deactivation autoresponder, Email list building – everything in one place.

Features
WordPress Analytics
Deactivation Auto Responder
Software Licensing
Automatic Update Deployment
Helpful Links
Developer Guide
User Guide
Docs
Privacy Policy
Affiliate
Affiliate Area
Affiliate Terms and Conditions
Join Us Now!
First Name *
Enter first name
Email *
Enter email
Submit
A
weDevs
product
© 2025, Appsero. All Rights Reserved.






Beta
0 / 10
used queries
siliconvalley4u logo
About
Partnerships
Explore

Camps & Courses


08
05/2022
Best Practices of Coding
Written by :

If you have been coding for two or three years or even more than that, you have probably been significantly slowed down by a messy code. Being a professional you would read some 100x lines of code compared to what you write. Over the span of a year or two, teams that were moving fast at the beginning of a project can find themselves slowed down due to the messy code written by their teammates.

‍

A programmer with code sense can understand a messy code and recognize a mess but will have no idea what to do.

‍

Now, we have understood how important it is to write clean code, but “what is clean code?”

‍

Clean code can be read, and enhanced by a developer other than its original author. It has meaningful names. Code should be literate since depending on the language, not all necessary information can be expressed clearly in code alone.

‍

Few aspects to be considered while writing clean code:

‍

Meaningful names
Use intention-revealing names
Avoid dis informatic names
Use pronounceable names
Don't use single letter names which not reveal what they mean
Class name should be a noun / noun phrase like Customer, Account. A class name should not be a verb
Method names should have a verb or verb phrase like setNum, getNum, checkBalance.
Refrain from using same variables with different purposes
You can always use CS domain names, algorithm names, pattern names as the people who read your code will be mostly programmers.
Functions
Functions should be small
Functions should do one thing i.e. it should perform only one task.
We want the code to read like a top-down narrative. We want every function to follow an order so that we can read the code.
Choose a good name to the function so that it talks about its functionality.
Function arguments - A function should have minimal or no arguments. Arguments are hard. They take a lot of conceptual power. Arguments are even harder from a testing point of view. Imagine the difficulty of writing all test cases to ensure all various combinations of arguments work properly.
Don't ever pass a boolean value as an argument to the function.
Make sure that your function has no side effects i.e. as mentioned above a function should always do a single task and should not affect any other literal/ variable values which it need not to do.
Restructure and refine the function until it reads the way you want it to read, even if you start with long and complicated functions containing lots of nested loops or dis informatic names.
Comments
Nothing can be helpful as a well - placed comments and nothing can be clutter up a code more than unnecessary comments
If  the programming language we use is expressive enough, or if we are able to express our intention enough with our code we do not need a lot of comments or  maybe not at all!
The proper use of comments is to compensate for our failure to express ourself in code.
So when you find yourself writing a comment, think through and see whether there isn’t some way to express yourself in code.
Remember that clear and expressive code with few comments is far better than complex code with lots of comments
If you decide to write a comment then spend necessary time and make sure that it is the best comment that you can write.
Let us look into few purposes where commenting your code would become mandatory:
Legal comments - Comments about copyright and authorship statements
Informative comments - Comments which talk about the task of a function. But it is always suggested to use proper names for such functions instead  of writing the comment.
Comments which explain the intention of the code written.
TODO comments - explains why the function has a degenerate implementation and what the function’s future should be
Don'ts while writing a comment:
Redundant comments - Don't write comments for redundant code snippets in any programming language.
Misleading comments - It’s better not to write comments than writing some inaccurate or misleading comments
Use proper function names or variable names instead of commenting their functionality
Position markers - Don’t use a series of slashes or dashes just to separate blocks of code instead intend properly.
Commented out code - Don't leave unnecessary lines of code commented out just like that. If you have completed working on the code make sure that you remove commented out lines which you used while testing.
Formatting
Vertical openness between concepts -  Each line in a code represents an expression or a clause and each group represents a complex thought. Those thoughts should be separated from each other by blank lines.
Vertical Density - Group the lines of code which perform a specific task into one dense code block.
Vertical declarations - Variables should be declared as close to their usage as possible
Vertical distance - Concepts that are closely related to each other should be kept closely to each other
Dependent functions - If one function calls another function they should be kept close to each other and the caller should be above the callee.
Indentation - Make sure your code is indented properly. It makes the reader understand the code much easier than that of unindented code.
Finally, make sure to keep your lines shorter. Follow the rule that you never scroll to the right while reading the code. You can edge your lines at 100 or 120 characters for that.
‍

Everyone can write code but writing a piece of code that every one can understand is an art.

‍

Website: www.siliconvalley4u.com

Email: info@siliconvalley4u.com

Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/siliconvalley4u/

Twitter: https://twitter.com/Siliconvalley41

LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/company/siliconvalley4u

‍

Written by Deekshitha Kashetty, a Siliconvalley4u's student

Share :

Build your tech career with Siliconvalley4u
popular Posts
Recent Post

Gurumurthy Yeleswarapu: The Leader Pioneering the Future of Technology and Education
January 4, 2025


Minecraft for Kids: Why Online Lessons are the Best Way to Learn and Play

What is CYBER SECURITY, and how does it help?
August 8, 2024


The Importance of an Authentic Profile for Students in College Admissions and Employment
August 7, 2024

Kid education
Leadership
Career Advice
Industry Insights
Skills and Concepts
Programming Languages
Minecraft
podcast
3D-modelling
Cybersecurity
Machine Learning
AI and Robotics
IOT-Internet of thing
Blockchain
Databases
AP CS
12 Weeks Course
Coding Academy
Scratch
All levels
Product
Instructor
Advanced
Intermediate
Beginner
Course
CSS
HTML
C++
Java
Javascript
Python
Special
Elementary
High School
Internships
College & above
Middle School
Camps
Related Posts

Gurumurthy Yeleswarapu: The Leader Pioneering the Future of Technology and Education
01/2025

Meet Akhil Yeleswarapu: The Leader Empowering the Next Generation Through Mentorship and Innovation
12/2024

Top 10 Free AI Platforms Educators Should Explore in 2025
Learn your tech job today with siliconvalley4u
START NOW
Jumpstart your tech career with courses in full stack development, machine learning, internships, and a $12k annual bonus

siliconvalley4u logo
Contact us
(408) 400-7054
(925) 594-6098

info@siliconvalley4u.com
b2bsales@siliconvalley4u.com

Stay up to date on all things sv4u
Email Address
Information
Home
Programs & Courses
Free Trial Course
About Us
Jobs & Internships
Blog
Roadmap
Partnerships
Locations
San Diego
Woodland Hills
Australia
India
Ghana
Ethiopia
Irvine
San Ramon
Bakersfield
Concord
Cookie Consent
By clicking “Accept”, you agree to the storing of cookies on your device to enhance site navigation, analyze site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts. View our Privacy Policy for more information.

DenyAccept
Copyright © 2022 siliconvalley4u. All rights reserved.
Privacy · Sitemap
Miguel


Beta
0 / 10
used queries
1
Code Conquest

Home
 
What is Coding?
 
Tutorials
 
Training
 
Reviews
 
Knowledge Center
 
Versus
 
Blog
You are here: Home / Learn To Code / Best Coding Practices in 2023
Best Coding Practices in 2023
January 22, 2023 by Aditya Raj


Writing good code is an art. You can easily debug programs and increase your productivity if you write clean, readable, and maintainable code. It will also help your successors to read and understand your code quickly and maintain it. In this article, we will discuss some of the best coding practices that you can use in 2023 to write clean code. 

Why Should You Follow Best Coding Practices?
Following best coding practices to write clean, efficient, and maintainable code has many benefits. Let us discuss some of them.

Improved readability and maintainability of code: If you write clean, readable, and maintainable code, anyone can read and understand it. This will help your team maintain your code even if you aren’t present there. 
Reduced errors and bugs: If you follow the best coding practices and naming conventions, your code will have fewer errors and bugs. For example, if you don’t follow the standard naming conventions in python, you may name a variable full_name or fullName. Suppose that you have created the variable full_name and mistakenly use the name fullName for the same variable, the program will run into an error. On the other hand, if you are following the best coding practices, you will always use the same naming convention. Hence, your code will not run into errors.
Improved Performance: Writing code with best practices can help you increase the efficiency of your code. For example, instead of iterating over a column of pandas dataframe in python to find the sum of all the values, you can use the aggregate sum() function. Using an aggregate function will improve the performance of your code manifolds. Similarly, If you use a floating point number instead of an integer, it takes more computation time and storage. Hence, using appropriate data types for variables can help you improve the performance of your code too.
Increased collaboration: If everyone in your team writes clean and readable code with proper conventions, it will become very easier for you all to collaborate. You can even work on a team member’s part in their absence just by going through the code once. So, following best practices for coding increases collaboration significantly. 
Reduced Development Time: Following best coding practices will lead to fewer errors and bugs. It will also increase collaboration and decrease the time spent on debugging. Hence, the total time taken in the development of the entire project will reduce.
Monetary benefits: Reduced development time and increased efficiency of the code will save you thousands of dollars in the form of developer salaries. After finishing a project quickly, they can be assigned new projects. This will help your organization generate more revenue and hence more bonuses and salary hikes for the developers. So, following best coding practices has the ability to help you earn more too.
 Enhanced scalability: Following best practices for programming can also help you write scalable code. For instance, if you write code with high cohesion and less coupling, and follow object-oriented programming methodology to create independent software components for each activity, you can efficiently scale your code.
Looking at the benefits of following best practices for programming, you might want to consider following them while writing code. Let us discuss some of the best coding practices that you can start using in 2023 and beyond.

Suggested Reading: C# vs Python: Performance, Syntax, and Applicability

12 Best Coding Practices for You to Follow
I have listed 12 best coding practices that you can start using in 2023 and beyond. This is not an exhaustive list and there can be more additions to it. However, the following are some of the best practices for programming in my experience.  

Write clear and readable code: You should write code that is easy to understand, follow and maintain. You can do it by using meaningful variable and function names, using appropriate indentation, and following coding conventions and standards.
Use the latest tools and technologies: You should keep up to date with the latest advancements in programming languages, frameworks, libraries, and tools to improve efficiency, security, and performance. Using the latest tools will help you write code better and faster.
Emphasize code quality: You can use static code analysis tools and automated testing to improve code quality and catch bugs early in the development cycle. This will help you avoid any unwanted consequences in the later stages of software development. Debugging errors in the later stages of development is a tedious task because each error can have an avalanche effect and finding the original error might be hard for you and your team.
Use version control systems: Ask your team to use version control systems such as Git to track changes, collaborate with others, and roll back to previous versions of the code if necessary. This will help you collaborate efficiently with other team members.
Write and maintain comprehensive documentation: You should always create documentation for your software project. You need to provide clear and accurate documentation for the code, including comments and user guides, to facilitate understanding and maintenance. This documentation will help the developers to understand the code better if they run into problems in the future. 
Implement error and exception handling: A program without a proper exception-handling mechanism is a ticking time bomb. You should always analyze the corner cases and implement the code to catch and handle errors and exceptions in a graceful way. This will help you to prevent crashes in the application and improve user experience.
Follow established coding conventions and standards: You should adhere to established coding conventions and standards, such as PEP 8 for Python and Java Code Conventions for Java, to improve code readability and maintainability.
Write test cases and test your code: You should write test cases to test different scenarios and edge cases. Then, you need to perform tests to ensure that the code is working as expected before deploying it to the production environment.
Keep your code modular and reusable: Breaking your code into smaller, reusable modules makes it more maintainable and easier to understand. For example, you can convert repetitive code into a function and define proper classes to modularize code. This will help you write code faster.
Constantly review and refactor your code: Regularly review and refactor your code to improve its performance, maintainability, and scalability. What you have written today might look inefficient to you if you learn advanced approaches to code in the future. So, you should refactor the old code using your learnings. This will help keep your code efficient and updated. 
Keep learning and stay updated with industry developments: Continuously learning new technologies, methodologies, and best practices will help you improve your skills and stay relevant in the industry. This will also help you gain promotions and hikes very quickly and will keep you ahead of the competition.
Focus on security: Cyber attacks are inevitable. Therefore, you should try to write secure code to prevent malicious attacks and data breaches by using secure coding practices and testing for vulnerabilities. This will help your organization save millions of dollars that might go towards paying ransom for the attackers. And remember, this cost is in addition to the economic and reputation losses that will happen due to the attack.
Suggested Reading: C Sharp and Sequel Programming Languages

Conclusion
In this article, we have discussed the best coding practices that you can start using in 2023 and beyond. All these techniques are general ones that you can use while coding in any language. If you want to learn the best coding practices in specific languages, you can read this article on best coding practices in java. 

To learn more about programming, you can read this article on C# vs Java. You might also like this article on whether should I learn SQL or python first.




Related
Code Documentation: Tools and Techniques
July 8, 2023
In "Learn To Code"
Coding vs Programming: How Are They Different?
December 27, 2021
In "Learn To Code"
6 Coding Habits of Successful Developers
July 27, 2021
In "Learn To Code"


Disclosure of Material Connection: Some of the links in the post above are “affiliate links.” This means if you click on the link and purchase the item, I will receive an affiliate commission. Regardless, I only recommend products or services I use personally and believe will add value to my readers.

Search this website
Popular Series
What is Coding?
How to Make Your First Website
Understanding Hex Color Codes
How to Become a Coder in 6 Months: a Step-by-Step Action Plan
How to Start a Coding Project
Get Our Newsletter
Enter your email address and we'll notify you whenever we add something new to the site.

First Name
 
Email Address
 

Popular Blog Posts
The 50 Best Websites to Learn Python
The 50 Best Websites to Learn JavaScript
The 50 Best Websites to Learn PHP
Want to Switch Careers? Coding May Be the Perfect Solution!
9 of the Hottest Tech Skills Hiring Managers Look for on LinkedIn
Latest Blog Posts
Effective Strategies For Debugging Code
Effective Time Management Tips for Programmers
Code Documentation: Tools and Techniques
Is Data Analytics Hard to Learn?
Comparing Data Science vs Computer Science

Explore Code Conquest
What is Coding?
Free Code Tutorials
Coding Training Recommendations
Coding Training Reviews
Knowledge Center
Cheat Sheets
Coding Quizzes
Versus
Deals, Discounts and Coupons
Deals
Code Conquest
Home
About
Privacy Policy
Contact Us
Terms of Use
Write for Us
Featured Review
Copyright © 2025 Code Conquest · About · Terms · Privacy · Contact Us · Write For Us

Beta
0 / 10
used queries


WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Contents hide
(Top)
Software maintenance

Quality
Coding standards
Reduction of complexity
Refactoring
Task automation
Language factors
Common conventions
See also
References
Coding conventions

Article
Talk
Read
Edit
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color (beta)

Automatic

Light

Dark
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

This article includes a list of general references, but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations. Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations. (April 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this message)
Part of a series on
Software development
Core activities
Paradigms and models
Methodologies and frameworks
Supporting disciplines
Practices
Tools
Standards and bodies of knowledge
Glossaries
Outlines
vte
Coding conventions are a set of guidelines for a specific programming language that recommend programming style, practices, and methods for each aspect of a program written in that language. These conventions usually cover file organization, indentation, comments, declarations, statements, white space, naming conventions, programming practices, programming principles, programming rules of thumb, architectural best practices, etc. These are guidelines for software structural quality. Software programmers are highly recommended to follow these guidelines to help improve the readability of their source code and make software maintenance easier. Coding conventions are only applicable to the human maintainers and peer reviewers of a software project. Conventions may be formalized in a documented set of rules that an entire team or company follows,[1] or may be as informal as the habitual coding practices of an individual. Coding conventions are not enforced by compilers.

Software maintenance
Reducing the cost of software maintenance is the most often cited reason for following coding conventions. In the introductory section on code conventions for the Java programming language, Sun Microsystems offers the following reasoning:[2]

Code conventions are important to programmers for a number of reasons:

40%–80% of the lifetime cost of a piece of software goes to maintenance.[3]
Hardly any software is maintained for its whole life by the original author.
Code conventions improve the readability of the software, allowing engineers to understand new code more quickly and thoroughly.
If you ship your source code as a product, you need to make sure it is as well packaged and clean as any other product you create.
Quality
Software peer review frequently involves reading source code. This type of peer review is primarily a defect detection activity. By definition, only the original author of a piece of code has read the source file before the code is submitted for review. Code that is written using consistent guidelines is easier for other reviewers to understand and assimilate, improving the efficacy of the defect detection process.

Even for the original author, consistently coded software eases maintainability. There is no guarantee that an individual will remember the precise rationale for why a particular piece of code was written in a certain way long after the code was originally written. Coding conventions can help. Consistent use of whitespace improves readability and reduces the time it takes to understand the software.

Coding standards
Where coding conventions have been specifically designed to produce high-quality code, and have then been formally adopted, they then become coding standards. Specific styles, irrespective of whether they are commonly adopted, do not automatically produce good quality code.

Reduction of complexity
Complexity is a factor going against security.[4]

The management of complexity includes the following basic principle: minimize the amount of code written during the project development. This prevents unnecessary work which prevents unnecessary cost, both upfront and downstream. This is simply because if there is less code, it is less work not only to create the application, but also to maintain it.

Complexity is managed both at the design stage (how the project is architectured) and at the development stage (by having simpler code). If the coding is kept basic and simple then the complexity will be minimised. Very often this is keeping the coding as 'physical' as possible - coding in a manner that is very direct and not highly abstract. This produces optimal code that is easy to read and follow. Complexity can also be avoided simply by not using complicated tools for simple jobs.

The more complex the code is the more likely it is to be buggy, the more difficult the bugs are to find and the more likely there are to be hidden bugs.

Refactoring
Refactoring refers to a software maintenance activity where source code is modified to improve readability or improve its structure. Software is often refactored to bring it into conformance with a team's stated coding standards after its initial release. Any change that does not alter the behavior of the software can be considered refactoring. Common refactoring activities are changing variable names, renaming methods, moving methods or whole classes and breaking large methods (or functions) into smaller ones.

Agile software development methodologies plan for regular (or even continuous) refactoring making it an integral part of the team software development process.[5]

Task automation
Coding conventions allow programmers to have simple scripts or programs whose job is to process source code for some purpose other than compiling it into an executable. It is common practice to count the software size (Source lines of code) to track current project progress or establish a baseline for future project estimates.

Consistent coding standards can, in turn, make the measurements more consistent. Special tags within source code comments are often used to process documentation, two notable examples are javadoc and doxygen. The tools specify the use of a set of tags, but their use within a project is determined by convention.

Coding conventions simplify writing new software whose job is to process existing software. Use of static code analysis has grown consistently since the 1950s. Some of the growth of this class of development tools stems from increased maturity and sophistication of the practitioners themselves (and the modern focus on safety and security), but also from the nature of the languages themselves.

Language factors
All software practitioners must grapple with the problem of organizing and managing a large number of sometimes complex instructions. For all but the smallest software projects, source code (instructions) are partitioned into separate files and frequently among many directories. It was natural for programmers to collect closely related functions (behaviors) in the same file and to collect related files into directories. As software development shifted from purely procedural programming (such as found in FORTRAN) towards more object-oriented constructs (such as found in C++), it became the practice to write the code for a single (public) class in a single file (the 'one class per file' convention).[6][7] Java has gone one step further - the Java compiler returns an error if it finds more than one public class per file.

A convention in one language may be a requirement in another. Language conventions also affect individual source files. Each compiler (or interpreter) used to process source code is unique. The rules a compiler applies to the source creates implicit standards. For example, Python code is much more consistently indented than, say Perl, because whitespace (indentation) is actually significant to the interpreter. Python does not use the brace syntax Perl uses to delimit functions. Changes in indentation serve as the delimiters.[8][9] Tcl, which uses a brace syntax similar to Perl or C/C++ to delimit functions, does not allow the following, which seems fairly reasonable to a C programmer:

 set i = 0
 while {$i < 10} 
 {
    puts "$i squared = [expr $i*$i]"
    incr i
 }
The reason is that in Tcl, curly braces are not used only to delimit functions as in C or Java. More generally, curly braces are used to group words together into a single argument.[10][11] In Tcl, the word while takes two arguments, a condition and an action. In the example above, while is missing its second argument, its action (because the Tcl also uses the newline character to delimit the end of a command).

Common conventions
There are a large number of coding conventions; see Coding Style for numerous examples and discussion. Common coding conventions may cover the following areas:

Comment conventions
Indent style conventions
Line length conventions
Naming conventions
Programming practices
Programming principles
Programming style conventions
Coding standards include the CERT C Coding Standard, MISRA C, High Integrity C++.

See also
Comparison of programming languages (syntax)
Hungarian Notation
Indent style
List of tools for static code analysis
List of software development philosophies
MISRA
Programming style
Software metrics
Software quality
The Power of 10 Rules
References
 "EditorConfig helps developers define and maintain consistent coding styles between different editors and IDEs". EditorConfig.
 "Code Conventions for the Java Programming Language : Why Have Code Conventions". Sun Microsystems, Inc. 1999-04-20.
 Robert L. Glass: Facts and Fallacies of Software Engineering; Addison Wesley, 2003.
 Tom Gillis. "Complexity is the enemy of security".
 Jeffries, Ron (2001-11-08). "What is Extreme Programming? : Design Improvement". XP Magazine. Archived from the original on 2006-12-15.
 Hoff, Todd (2007-01-09). "C++ Coding Standard : Naming Class Files".
 FIFE coding standards
 van Rossum, Guido (2006-09-19). Fred L. Drake, Jr (ed.). "Python Tutorial : First Steps Towards Programming". Python Software Foundation. Archived from the original on 2008-09-28. Retrieved 2014-08-17.
 Raymond, Eric (2000-05-01). "Why Python?". Linux Journal.
 Tcl Developer Xchange. "Summary of Tcl language syntax". ActiveState.
 Staplin, George Peter (2006-07-16). "Why can I not start a new line before a brace group". 'the Tcler's Wiki'.
Category: Source code
This page was last edited on 3 December 2024, at 06:06 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia FoundationPowered by MediaWiki
Beta
0 / 10
used queries
1
Angels Design
Top 10 Coding Best Practices for Beginners
Posted on 2024-09-28 23:09:21
Introduction   


Coding, while a rewarding skill, can also be a complex and challenging endeavor.
In the world of programming, coding best practices serve as essential guidelines that help developers write clean, efficient, and maintainable code. For beginners, adopting these practices early on can significantly enhance the quality of their work and set a strong foundation for their coding journey.

By following best practices, you not only make your code more readable and understandable for yourself and others, but you also reduce the likelihood of bugs and errors. This results in a smoother development process and ensures that your projects are easier to manage and scale in the future. Whether you're collaborating with a team or working solo, embracing these principles will empower you to become a more effective and confident programmer.

Factors to Consider
Business Needs and Goals
When selecting a Content Management System (CMS), it's crucial to align its capabilities with your specific business needs and objectives. This ensures that the CMS effectively supports your operations and helps you achieve your goals.
Assessing Your Business Requirements


E-commerce: If your business involves selling products or services online, a CMS with robust e-commerce features is essential. Look for platforms that offer shopping cart functionality, product management tools, payment gateways, and inventory management capabilities.


Blogging: For content-driven websites like blogs or news portals, a CMS with strong blogging features is crucial. Consider platforms that offer easy-to-use content creation tools, SEO optimization features, and social media integration.

Other Considerations: Assess other specific requirements such as:
Marketing and SEO: Does the CMS offer features to optimize your website for search engines?

Social media integration: Can the CMS easily integrate with your social media platforms?
Multilingual support: If your business operates in multiple languages, does the CMS support multilingual content?
Scalability: Can the CMS handle your website's growth and increased traffic?


Aligning CMS Capabilities with Business Goals
Short-term and long-term goals: Consider your business's immediate and future objectives. The CMS should be able to support your current needs while also providing flexibility for future growth.


Budget: Determine your budget for the CMS and associated costs (e.g., hosting, themes, plugins).
Team expertise: Evaluate your team's technical skills and experience. Choose a CMS that aligns with their capabilities and minimizes the learning curve.


By carefully considering your business needs and goals, you can select a CMS that empowers your organization to achieve its objectives and succeed in the digital landscape.

2. User-Friendliness


User-friendliness is a critical factor when selecting a Content Management System (CMS), especially for beginners. An intuitive interface allows users to navigate the system effortlessly, reducing the learning curve and enabling them to focus on creating content rather than grappling with complex tools.

A CMS with a straightforward layout and clear labeling helps users find what they need quickly, whether it’s adding new content, updating existing pages, or adjusting settings. This efficiency not only saves time but also enhances productivity, making it easier to manage a website without extensive technical knowledge.


The Significance of an Intuitive Interface
Increased productivity: A user-friendly CMS enables content creators to focus on creating content rather than struggling with complex interfaces.
Reduced training costs: A straightforward interface minimizes the need for extensive training, saving time and resources.
Improved content quality: When users are comfortable with the CMS, they are more likely to produce high-quality content.

Look for Drag-and-Drop Features and Easy Navigation
Additionally, look for drag-and-drop features in your chosen CMS. These tools allow you to design and arrange content visually, making it simple to customize the layout of your site without needing to write code. This functionality is particularly beneficial for users who may feel overwhelmed by programming languages or design principles.


Easy Navigation
Furthermore, easy navigation is essential. A well-structured menu and clearly defined sections ensure that users can locate key features and functions without frustration. The more user-friendly the CMS, the more likely you are to create and maintain a vibrant online presence, empowering you to focus on growing your business rather than troubleshooting technical issues.

3. Customization Options


When selecting a Content Management System (CMS), the ability to customize your site is crucial for meeting your unique business needs and aesthetic preferences. Customization options, such as templates and plugins, play a significant role in enhancing your website's functionality and user experience.

Templates provide the foundational design and layout of your website. A variety of templates allows you to choose a look that aligns with your brand identity, whether you’re creating a sleek corporate site, a vibrant e-commerce store, or a personal blog. Customizable templates enable you to adjust colors, fonts, and layouts, giving you control over the visual presentation without needing extensive design skills. For example, a restaurant might select a template that highlights menu items and includes reservation features, while a portfolio site can showcase images in an eye-catching gallery format.

Plugins are additional tools that extend the capabilities of your CMS. They can add functionalities like contact forms, SEO optimization tools, social media integration, and e-commerce features. For instance, if you run an online store, a plugin for payment gateways can facilitate secure transactions, while an SEO plugin can help optimize your content for search engines, driving more traffic to your site.


Examples of How Customization Can Enhance Functionality
E-commerce features: Plugins can add advanced e-commerce features such as product variations, shipping calculators, and customer reviews.
SEO optimization: Plugins can help improve your website's search engine rankings by providing features like meta tag management, keyword analysis, and sitemaps.
Social media integration: Plugins can seamlessly integrate your website with social media platforms, allowing you to share content and engage with your audience.
Form builders: Plugins can help you create custom forms for contact, surveys, or lead generation purposes.
Analytics tools: Plugins can provide valuable insights into your website's traffic, user behavior, and performance.

Customizing your CMS with the right templates and plugins not only enhances functionality but also ensures that your website can evolve as your business grows. This flexibility allows you to adapt to changing trends, incorporate new technologies, and continuously improve user experience, making it easier to meet your goals over time.

4. SEO Capabilities


When choosing a Content Management System (CMS), robust SEO capabilities are essential for improving your website's visibility on search engines. Built-in SEO tools can streamline the optimization process, making it easier for you to enhance your site’s search engine rankings without needing extensive technical expertise.

These tools often include features like customizable meta tags, SEO-friendly URLs, and automatic XML sitemaps, which help search engines index your site more effectively.


How Built-in SEO Tools Can Benefit Website Visibility
Meta tag management: Easily manage meta titles and descriptions, which are crucial for providing search engines with relevant information about your pages.
URL structure optimization: Create clean and descriptive URLs that are easy to understand and navigate.
Sitemaps: Automatically generate sitemaps that help search engines crawl and index your website's content.
Keyword research: Identify relevant keywords and phrases to target in your content.
Mobile optimization: Ensure your website is optimized for mobile devices, as mobile search has become increasingly important.

Another crucial aspect of SEO is clean code. A CMS that generates well-structured HTML and CSS can significantly enhance your site's performance. Clean code helps search engines crawl your site more efficiently, which can lead to better rankings. Moreover, it contributes to faster loading times, an increasingly important factor in both user experience and SEO.

Fast loading times not only reduce bounce rates but also improve overall user satisfaction. Users are more likely to stay on a site that loads quickly, leading to longer visit durations and higher engagement. Search engines, like Google, prioritize sites that offer a seamless experience, so optimizing for speed is a key component of effective SEO.

5. Security Features: Protecting Your Website


In today's digital landscape, security is a top priority for any website. Choosing a CMS with robust security measures is essential to protect your website from potential threats such as hacking, malware, and data breaches.
Strong security measures often include features such as SSL certification, which encrypts data transmitted between the user and the server, ensuring secure transactions and communications. Additionally, a reputable CMS should provide built-in defenses against common threats, such as SQL injection, cross-site scripting (XSS), and brute force attacks. Choosing a CMS that emphasizes security can greatly reduce your vulnerability to these risks, fostering trust among your users.


Regular Updates and Support for Plugins or Themes
CMS updates: Keep your CMS up-to-date with the latest security patches and bug fixes. Regular updates can address vulnerabilities and protect your website from attacks.
Plugin and theme updates: Ensure that plugins and themes you use are regularly updated. Outdated plugins and themes can introduce security risks.
Support: Choose a CMS with a strong support community or professional support services. This can help you troubleshoot security issues and receive assistance when needed.

6. Scalability


When selecting a Content Management System (CMS), it's crucial to consider scalability—the ability of the system to grow alongside your business. As your organization evolves, your website will likely need to accommodate increased traffic, additional content, and new functionalities. A scalable CMS ensures that you won't have to start from scratch or face significant limitations as your needs change.


Why It's Important to Choose a CMS That Can Grow with Your Business
Increased traffic: As your business expands, you'll likely experience increased website traffic. A scalable CMS can handle the additional load without slowing down or crashing.
Content growth: As your content library expands, your CMS needs to be able to efficiently store and manage large amounts of data.
Future expansion: A scalable CMS provides a solid foundation for future growth, allowing you to easily add new features and functionalities as your business evolves.


Features That Support Increased Traffic and Content
Performance optimization: Look for a CMS that offers features like caching, content delivery networks (CDNs), and database optimization to improve website performance and speed.
Scalable infrastructure: Consider a CMS that can be easily scaled up or down to accommodate changes in traffic or content.
Large-scale content management: Ensure the CMS can handle large amounts of content, including images, videos, and other media files.
Integration capabilities: A scalable CMS should be able to integrate with other tools and services, such as marketing automation platforms and analytics tools.

7. Support and Community


When choosing a Content Management System (CMS), the quality of customer support and the presence of an active user community are critical factors that can significantly enhance your experience. Reliable customer support ensures that you have access to assistance when you encounter technical issues or have questions about the system. This support can come in various forms, including live chat, email, and phone support, which can be invaluable, especially for beginners who may face challenges navigating the platform.


The Value of Customer Support and an Active User Community
Problem-solving: When encountering issues or challenges, a responsive support team can provide timely assistance and solutions.
Knowledge sharing: An active user community offers a wealth of knowledge and experience. Other users can share tips, best practices, and solutions to common problems.


Learning and development: Forums, tutorials, and documentation provide opportunities to learn new skills and stay updated on the latest CMS developments.
Networking: Connecting with other users can help you build relationships and expand your professional network.
Forums, Tutorials, and Documentation


Forums: Online forums allow users to discuss topics, ask questions, and share experiences. Many CMS platforms have dedicated forums where users can connect and seek help.
Tutorials: Tutorials provide step-by-step guidance on various aspects of the CMS, from basic setup to advanced customization.
Documentation: Comprehensive documentation provides detailed information about the CMS's features, functionality, and best practices.

8. Cost Considerations


When selecting a Content Management System (CMS), understanding the various pricing models and potential hidden costs is essential for making an informed decision. Here's an overview of the different pricing structures and considerations:

Pricing Models
Free CMS Options

Many CMS platforms offer free versions that provide basic functionalities. Examples include WordPress.org and Joomla.
While these options have no upfront costs, you may need to invest in hosting and additional features (like plugins or themes) to enhance functionality.
Subscription-Based CMS

Platforms like Squarespace and Wix operate on a subscription model, where you pay a monthly or annual fee for access to their services.
These plans often include hosting, security, and regular updates, simplifying management for users. However, the overall cost can accumulate over time, especially if you opt for higher-tier plans to access advanced features.


One-Time Fee CMS

Some CMS solutions, particularly self-hosted options, may require a one-time purchase fee for a license. Examples include certain premium versions of CMS platforms or specific themes.
While this can seem cost-effective initially, keep in mind the ongoing costs for hosting and potential updates.

Hidden Costs
Hosting Fees

If you choose a self-hosted CMS, you'll need to pay for web hosting services, which can vary widely in price based on bandwidth, storage, and support.

Be sure to factor in these costs when budgeting for your CMS.


Domain Registration

Registering a custom domain is an additional expense that should be included in your overall costs. Domain prices can vary based on the registrar and domain extension.


Premium Themes and Plugins

While many free themes and plugins are available, you may find that premium options offer better features, support, and customization. These can add to your initial setup costs.
Keep in mind that some plugins may require annual renewal fees for continued access to updates and support.

Maintenance and Support

Depending on your technical skills, you may need to hire a developer for ongoing maintenance or support, which can add to your overall costs.
Some CMS platforms offer managed services, which may include ongoing support for an additional fee.
By carefully evaluating the pricing models and considering potential hidden costs, you can make a more informed decision about which CMS will best meet your budget and business needs. Being aware of these factors can help you avoid unexpected expenses and ensure a smoother journey as you build and manage your website.

9. Integration Capabilities: Expanding Your CMS's Functionality


A Content Management System (CMS) that can seamlessly integrate with other tools and services enhances its capabilities and provides a more comprehensive solution for your business. Integrations allow you to streamline workflows, automate tasks, and gain valuable insights into your website's performance.

The Need for Integration
Streamlined workflows: Integrations can help you connect disparate systems and automate tasks, saving time and effort.
Enhanced functionality: Integrating your CMS with other tools can add new features and capabilities that are not built-in to the core platform.
Data-driven decision-making: Integrations can provide valuable data and insights that can inform your business decisions.


Examples of Popular Integrations
Email Marketing

Integrating your CMS with email marketing platforms (like Mailchimp or Constant Contact) allows you to easily capture leads from your website and automate email campaigns. This can enhance your marketing efforts by enabling targeted communication based on user behavior.


Analytics

Integration with analytics tools (such as Google Analytics) provides valuable insights into user behavior, traffic sources, and conversion rates. This data is essential for optimizing your content and marketing strategies, helping you make informed decisions to improve site performance.


E-commerce Solutions

For businesses that sell products online, integrating with e-commerce platforms (like Shopify or WooCommerce) is vital. This integration allows you to manage inventory, process transactions, and track sales directly from your CMS, providing a cohesive shopping experience for customers.


Social Media

Integrating social media platforms allows you to automate posting and engagement, making it easier to share content and connect with your audience. Tools like Buffer or Hootsuite can streamline your social media management and improve your online presence.


Customer Relationship Management (CRM)

Connecting your CMS to a CRM system (like Salesforce or HubSpot) helps manage customer interactions and data throughout the customer lifecycle. This integration can enhance lead tracking, sales reporting, and customer support.

Popular Integrations
Mailchimp: For email marketing automation, lead capture, and newsletter management.
Google Analytics: To track website performance and user engagement metrics.
WooCommerce: For integrating e-commerce functionalities into WordPress sites.
Zapier: To connect your CMS with thousands of other apps, automating workflows between them.
Yoast SEO: A popular SEO plugin for WordPress that helps optimize content for search engines.

10. Testing and Demos


When selecting a Content Management System (CMS), one of the best ways to determine the right fit for your needs is to test out different options through demos or free trials. Many CMS platforms offer trial versions that allow you to explore their features and functionalities before committing to a purchase. This hands-on experience can provide valuable insights into how well a CMS aligns with your specific requirements.

Importance of Testing
Testing different CMS options allows you to assess usability, design flexibility, and overall functionality in a real-world context. By navigating the interface and trying out key features, you can better understand the learning curve and how it will impact your day-to-day management of your website. Additionally, this process helps you identify any limitations that may affect your business operations down the line.

Creating a Checklist for Evaluation
To maximize your trial experience, consider creating a checklist to evaluate each CMS based on your business needs. Here are some key criteria to include:

User Interface and Ease of Use

Is the interface intuitive and user-friendly?
How easy is it to navigate through the CMS?
Customization Options

What templates and design options are available?
Can you easily customize layouts, colors, and fonts?
Features and Functionalities

Does the CMS offer the specific features you need (e.g., e-commerce, blogging, SEO tools)?
Are there plugins or extensions available to enhance functionality?
Integration Capabilities

Can the CMS easily integrate with other tools you use (e.g., email marketing, analytics)?
Are there any limitations on the integrations offered?
Support and Documentation

Is there readily available support (chat, email, phone)?
How comprehensive is the documentation and are there tutorials available?
Performance and Loading Speed

How quickly does the CMS load during your testing?
Are there any noticeable delays or lags when navigating?


Pricing and Value

What is the pricing structure, and does it fit within your budget?
Are there any hidden costs associated with the CMS?

Conclusion
Choosing the right Content Management System (CMS) is a pivotal decision that can significantly impact your online presence and business success. As we’ve discussed, there are several key factors to consider:

Business Needs and Goals: Assess your specific requirements, whether for e-commerce, blogging, or content management, and align your CMS choice with these goals.

User-Friendliness: Look for an intuitive interface and features like drag-and-drop functionality that make managing your website a breeze.

Customization Options: Evaluate the availability of templates and plugins to ensure you can tailor your site to fit your brand and functionality needs.

SEO Capabilities: Opt for a CMS that includes built-in SEO tools to enhance your website’s visibility and performance on search engines.

Security Features: Choose a platform with robust security measures and regular updates to protect your site and user data.

Scalability: Ensure the CMS can grow with your business, supporting increased traffic and content as your needs evolve.

Support and Community: Assess the availability of customer support and an active user community that can provide assistance and resources.

Cost Considerations: Be aware of the different pricing models and potential hidden costs associated with hosting, themes, and plugins.

Integration Capabilities: Look for a CMS that can seamlessly integrate with the tools you already use, enhancing your overall workflow.

Testing and Demos: Take advantage of demos or free trials to explore various CMS options. Use a checklist to evaluate their features and performance.

As you navigate the selection process, take your time to research thoroughly. Each business has unique needs, and finding the best fit for your specific situation will pay off in the long run. By carefully considering these factors and testing different options, you’ll be better equipped to choose a CMS that not only meets your current requirements but also supports your growth and success for years to come.

 

written by: Obed Adu

Blog Image
Back to Posts
© 2024 Angels Design. All rights reserved.

Beta
0 / 10
used queries
1
Skip to main content
User account menu
Log in
RSS
Home
Supported by Red Hat
Main navigation
Articles
Resources
Downloads
Frequently Asked Questions

30 best practices for software development and testing
These software engineering rules and testing best practices might help save you time and headaches.
By Michael Foord
May 24, 2017 | 7 Comments | 12 min read
1396 readers like this.
Can government agencies be innovative?
Image by:Opensource.com
Joining any new company—with an established culture and programming practices—can be a daunting experience. When I joined the Ansible team, I decided to write up the software engineering practices and principles I’ve learned over the years and to which I strive to work. This is a non-definitive, non-exhaustive list of principles that should be applied with wisdom and flexibility.

My passion is for testing, as I believe that good testing practices can both ensure a minimum quality standard (sadly lacking in many software products), and can guide and shape development itself. Many of these principles relate to testing practices and ideals. Some of these principles are Python-specific, but most are not. (For Python developers, PEP 8 should be your first stop for programming style and guidelines.)


Skip to content
Programming and development

Red Hat Developers Blog
Programming cheat sheets
Try for free: Red Hat Learning Subscription
eBook: An introduction to programming with Bash
Bash Shell Scripting Cheat Sheet
eBook: Modernizing Enterprise Java
In general, we programmers are an opinionated lot, and strong opinions are often a sign of great passion. With that in mind, feel free to disagree with these points, and we can discuss and debate them in the comments.

Development and testing best practices
1. YAGNI: "You Aint Gonna Need It". Don't write code that you think you might need in future, but don't need yet. This is coding for imaginary future use cases, and inevitably the code will become dead code or need rewriting because the future use case always turns out to work slightly differently from how you imagined it.

If you put code in for a future use case, I will question it in a code review. (You can, and must, design APIs, for example, to permit future use cases, but that's a different issue.)

The same is true for commenting-out code; if a block of commented code is going into a release, it shouldn't exist. If it is code that may be restored, make a ticket and reference the commit hash for the code delete. YAGNI is a core element of agile programming. The best reference for this is Extreme Programming Explained, by Kent Beck.

2. Tests don't need testing. Infrastructure, frameworks, and libraries for testing need tests. Don't test the browser or external libraries unless you really need to. Test the code you write, not other people’s code.

3. The third time you write the same piece of code is the right time to extract it into a general-purpose helper (and write tests for it). Helper functions within a test don't need testing; when you break them out and reuse them they do need tests. By the third time you've written similar code, you tend to have a clear idea of what shape the general-purpose problem is that you're solving.

4. When it comes to API design (external facing and object API): Simple things should be simple; complex things should be possible. Design for the simple case first, with preferably zero configuration or parameterization, if that's possible. Add options or additional API methods for more complex and flexible use cases (as they are needed).

5. Fail fast. Check input and fail on nonsensical input or invalid state as early as possible, preferably with an exception or error response that will make the exact problem clear to your caller. Permit "innovative" use cases of your code though (i.e., don't do type checking for input validation unless you really need to).

6. Unit tests test to the unit of behavior, not the unit of implementation. Changing the implementation, without changing the behavior or having to change any of your tests is the goal, although not always possible. So where possible, treat your test objects as black boxes, testing through the public API without calling private methods or tinkering with state.

For some complex scenarios—such as testing behavior on a specific complex state to find an obscure bug—that may not be possible. Writing tests first really helps with this as it forces you to think about the behavior of your code and how you're going to test it before you write it. Testing first encourages smaller, more modular units of code, which generally means better code. A good reference for getting started with the "test first" approach is Test Driven Development by Example, by Kent Beck.

7. For unit tests (including test infrastructure tests) all code paths should be tested. 100% coverage is a good place to start. You can't cover all possible permutations/combinations of state (combinatorial explosion), so that requires consideration. Only if there is a very good reason should code paths be left untested. Lack of time is not a good reason and ends up costing more time. Possible good reasons include: genuinely untestable (in any meaningful way), impossible to hit in practice, or covered elsewhere in a test. Code without tests is a liability. Measuring coverage and rejecting PRs that reduce coverage percentage is one way to ensure you make gradual progress in the right direction.

8. Code is the enemy: It can go wrong, and it needs maintenance. Write less code. Delete code. Don’t write code you don’t need.

9. Inevitably, code comments become lies over time. In practice, few people update comments when things change. Strive to make your code readable and self-documenting through good naming practices and known programming style.

Code that can't be made obvious—working around an obscure bug or unlikely condition, or a necessary optimization—does need commenting. Comment the intent of the code, and why it is doing something rather than what it is doing. (This particular point about comments being lies is controversial, by the way. I still think it’s correct, and Kernighan and Pike, authors of The Practice of Programming, agree with me.)

10. Write defensively. Always think about what can go wrong, what will happen on invalid input, and what might fail, which will help you catch many bugs before they happen.

11. Logic is easy to unit test if it is stateless and side-effect free. Break out logic into separate functions, rather than mixing logic into stateful and side-effect-filled code. Separating stateful code and code with side-effects into smaller functions makes them easier to mock out and unit test without side-effects. (Less overhead for tests means faster tests.) Side effects do need testing, but testing them once and mocking them out everywhere else is generally a good pattern.

12. Globals are bad. Functions are better than types. Objects are likely to be better than complex data structures.

13. Using the Python built-in types—and their methods—will be faster than writing your own types (unless you're writing in C). If performance is a consideration, try to work out how to use the standard built-in types rather than custom objects.

14. Dependency injection is a useful coding pattern for being clear about what your dependencies are and where they come from. (Have objects, methods, and so on receive their dependencies as parameters rather than instantiating new objects themselves.) This does make API signatures more complex, so it is a trade-off. Ending up with a method that needs 10 parameters for all its dependencies is good sign your code is doing too much, anyway. The definitive article on dependency injection is "Inversion of Control Containers and the Dependency Injection Pattern," by Martin Fowler.

15. The more you have to mock out to test your code, the worse your code is. The more code you have to instantiate and put in place to be able to test a specific piece of behavior, the worse your code is. The goal is small testable units, along with higher-level integration and functional tests to test that the units cooperate correctly.

16. External-facing APIs are where "design up front"—and consideration about future use cases—really matters. Changing APIs is a pain for us and for our users, and creating backwards incompatibility is horrible (although sometimes impossible to avoid). Design external facing APIs carefully, still keeping to the "simple things should be simple" principle.

17. If a function or method goes past 30 lines of code, consider breaking it up. A good maximum module size is about 500 lines. Test files tend to be longer than this.

18. Don’t do work in object constructors, which are hard to test and surprising. Don’t put code in __init__.py (except imports for namespacing). __init__.py is not where programmers generally expect to find code, so it’s "surprising."

19. DRY (Don’t Repeat Yourself) matters much less in tests than it does in production code. Readability of an individual test file is more important than maintainability (breaking out reusable chunks). That’s because tests are executed and read individually rather than themselves being part of a larger system. Obviously excessive repetition means reusable components can be created for convenience, but it’s much less of a concern than it is for production.

20. Refactor whenever you see the need and have the chance. Programming is about abstractions, and the closer your abstractions map to the problem domain, the easier your code is to understand and maintain. As systems grow organically, they need to change structure for their expanding use case. Systems outgrow their abstractions and structure, and not changing them becomes technical debt that is more painful (and slower and more buggy) to work around. Include the cost of clearing technical debt (refactoring) within the estimates for feature work. The longer you leave the debt around, the higher the interest it accumulates. A great book on refactoring and testing is Working Effectively with Legacy Code, by Michael Feathers.

21. Make code correct first and fast second. When working on performance issues, always profile before making fixes. Usually the bottleneck is not quite where you thought it was. Writing obscure code because it is faster is only worth it if you’ve profiled and proven that it’s actually worth it. Writing a test that exercises the code you’re profiling with timing around it makes knowing when you’re done easier, and can be left in the test suite to prevent performance regressions. (With the usual note that adding timing code always changes the performance characteristics of the code, making performance work one of the more frustrating tasks.)

22. Smaller, more tightly scoped unit tests give more valuable information when they fail—they tell you specifically what is wrong. A test that stands up half the system to test behavior takes more investigation to determine what is wrong. Generally a test that takes more than 0.1 seconds to run isn’t a unit test. There’s no such thing as a slow unit test. With tightly scoped unit tests testing behavior, your tests act as a de facto specification for your code. Ideally if someone wants to understand your code, they should be able to turn to the test suite as "documentation" for the behavior. A great presentation on unit testing practices is Fast Test, Slow Test, by Gary Bernhardt:



​

23. "Not Invented Here" is not as bad as people say. If we write the code, then we know what it does, we know how to maintain it, and we’re free to extend and modify it as we see fit. This follows the YAGNI principle: We have specific code for the use cases we need rather than general purpose code that has complexity for things we don’t need. On the other hand, code is the enemy, and owning more code than necessary is bad. Consider the trade-off when introducing a new dependency.

24. Shared code ownership is the goal; siloed knowledge is bad. At a minimum, this means discussing or documenting design decisions and important implementation decisions. Code review is the worst time to start discussing design decisions as the inertia to make sweeping changes after code has been written is hard to overcome. (Of course it’s still better to point out and change design mistakes at review time than never.)

25. Generators rock! They’re generally shorter and easier to understand than stateful objects for iteration or repeated execution. A good introduction to generators is "Generator Tricks for Systems Programmers," by David Beazley.

26. Let’s be engineers! Let’s think about design and build robust and well-implemented systems, rather than growing organic monsters. Programming is a balancing act, however. We’re not always building a rocket ship. Over-engineering (onion architecture) is as painful to work with as under-designed code. Almost anything by Robert Martin is worth reading, and Clean Architecture: A Craftsman’s Guide to Software Structure and Design is a good resource on this topic. Design Patterns is a classic programming book that every engineer should read.

27. Intermittently failing tests erode the value of your test suite, to the point in which eventually everyone ignores test run results because there’s always something failing. Fixing or deleting intermittently failing tests is painful, but worth the effort.

28. Generally, particularly in tests, wait for a specific change rather than sleeping for an arbitrary amount of time. Voodoo sleeps are hard to understand and slow down your test suite.

29. Always see your test fail at least once. Put a deliberate bug in and make sure it fails, or run the test before the behavior under test is complete. Otherwise you don’t know that you’re really testing anything. Accidentally writing tests that actually don’t test anything or that can never fail is easy.

30. And finally, a point for management: Constant feature grind is a terrible way to develop software. Not letting developers take pride in their work ensures you won’t get the best out of them. Not addressing technical debt slows down development and results in a worse, more buggy product.

Thanks to the Ansible team, and especially to Wayne Witzel, for comments and suggestions for improving the principles suggested in this list.

Want to break free from the IT processes and complexities holding you back from peak performance? Download this free eBook: Teaching an elephant to dance.

Tags
Programming
Michael Foord
Michael Foord
I’m Michael Foord and I’m a Python trainer and contractor. I specialise in teaching Python and the end-to-end automated testing of systems. My passion is for simplicity and clarity in code, efficient lightweight processes and for well designed systems. As a Python core developer I wrote parts of unittest and created the mock library which became unittest.mock.
More about me
7 Comments
These comments are closed.
Avatar
Greg Pittman
| May 24, 2017
No readers like this yet.
I'm impressed! 30 points!

Avatar
Jonathan Hartley | May 25, 2017
No readers like this yet.
The idea of comments degenerating over time into "lies" is one that I agree with. At one former job, working alongside the esteemed Mr Foord (the article author), we were all in the habit of simply referring to all comments as "lies", without forethought or malice. As in "The module has some lies at the top explaining that behaviour."

Avatar
David Alexis | May 27, 2017
No readers like this yet.
This is like saying that new tires end up being worn out, so drive only on smooth roads and only downhill, so you don't have to use tires. Lazy developers find excuses for not writing comments. The fact is that there is no such thing as perfectly readable code. What's readable to one person is a complete ball of mud to others. To force someone to read code just as a form of documentation is an irresponsible idea that is inefficient and assumes that only developers of a certain level should be looking at your code.

In reply to The idea of comments by Jonathan Hartley (not verified)
Avatar
ARaybold
| May 29, 2017
No readers like this yet.
I don't understand what you are saying in point number 2 - the first sentence, "tests don't need testing" seems to stand in contradiction to point 29.

Avatar
Pranay Pandey | May 30, 2017
No readers like this yet.
Prefect 30. Loved #23 especially, owning more code than necessary is bad.

Avatar
jrsofsd
| May 30, 2017
No readers like this yet.
A map without a legend and labels is "readable and self-documenting" but unnecessary torture. Comment the start and end of logic blocks and loops. Comment "returns" with values. If you don't like comments, a good editor will strip the lies from your eyes.

Avatar
Bryan James
| June 12, 2017
No readers like this yet.
Every software developer should read this article. It can really help them improve their coding habit.

Related Content
Pair programming
C vs. Go: Comparing programming languages
Programming keyboard.
Learn Tcl/Tk and Wish with this simple game
An introduction to GNU Screen
BASIC vs. FORTRAN 77: Comparing programming blasts from the past
Creative Commons License
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 4.0 International License.
About This Site
The opinions expressed on this website are those of each author, not of the author's employer or of Red Hat.

Opensource.com aspires to publish all content under a Creative Commons license but may not be able to do so in all cases. You are responsible for ensuring that you have the necessary permission to reuse any work on this site. Red Hat and the Red Hat logo are trademarks of Red Hat, Inc., registered in the United States and other countries.

A note on advertising: Opensource.com does not sell advertising on the site or in any of its newsletters.

Home
Copyright ©2025 Red Hat, Inc.

Legal
Privacy Policy
Terms of use
Cookie preferences
Beta
0 / 10
used queries
1

Code With C

About Us
C Tutorials
Java Tutorials
Python Tutorials
PHP Tutorials
Java Projects
Forums
Code With C > Blog > Best Practices for Implementing Coding Standards
Blog
Best Practices for Implementing Coding Standards

CodeLikeAGirl
Last updated: February 16, 2024 3:26 am
CodeLikeAGirl
Share
10 Min Read

71 Best Practices for Implementing Coding Standards
The Coding Chronicles: Unveiling the Secrets of Coding Standards 🚀

Contents
Importance of Coding Standards
Promotes Consistency
Improves Readability and Debugging
Creating and Documenting Coding Standards
Establishing Coding Guidelines
Documenting the Standards
Communicating and Training
Educating Development Team
Clear Communication
Tools and Automation
Using Code Analysis Tools
Integration with Development Environments
Regular Review and Revision
Conducting Regular Code Reviews
Updating Standards
In Closing
Program Code – Best Practices for Implementing Coding Standards
Code Output:
Code Explanation:
Hey there, fellow tech enthusiasts! 👩🏽‍💻 Today, we’re delving into the intricate world of coding standards. As an code-savvy friend 😋 girl with a knack for coding, I’ve come to realize that implementing coding standards is more than just a trend—it’s a game-changer in the realm of software development. So, grab your chai ☕ and let’s unravel the importance of coding standards and the best practices to ace their implementation!

Importance of Coding Standards
Promotes Consistency
Picture this: a symphony of code where every note plays harmoniously in unison. That’s the magic of coding standards! They ensure uniformity in coding style, creating a seamless experience for developers to navigate through the codebase effortlessly. 🎵
With consistent formatting and naming conventions, debugging becomes a walk in the park. No more hair-pulling sessions trying to decipher spaghetti code—phew! 🍝
Improves Readability and Debugging
Let’s face it: we’ve all stared blankly at a screen filled with cryptic code at some point. Coding standards come to the rescue by acting as a guiding light in the darkness of errors. 🌟
By enhancing code readability and structure, developers can quickly spot and rectify errors, making the debugging process a breeze. No more code mysteries left unsolved! 🔍
Creating and Documenting Coding Standards
Establishing Coding Guidelines
Like laying the foundation of a sturdy building, establishing coding guidelines sets the tone for a robust codebase. It involves identifying best practices, defining formatting rules, and setting the stage for a coding masterpiece. 🏗️
Embrace consistency by outlining clear naming conventions, commenting practices, and formatting rules. Remember, a well-documented code is a developer’s best friend! 📝
Documenting the Standards
Documenting coding standards is akin to penning down the rules of engagement in the coding realm. It involves creating a comprehensive guide for developers, complete with real-world examples and detailed explanations. 📘💻
Provide developers with a roadmap to navigate the codebase effortlessly. Remember, clarity is key in the world of coding standards!
Communicating and Training
Educating Development Team
Education is power, especially in the world of coding standards. Conduct training sessions to enlighten your development team on the importance of adhering to coding guidelines. 🌟
Empower your developers to embrace coding standards with open arms. Remember, a well-informed team is a formidable force in the coding universe! 💪
Clear Communication
Communication is the glue that holds teams together. Ensure that everyone is well-versed with the coding standards in place, fostering a culture of open dialogue and collaboration. 🤝
Encourage discussions around coding standards—after all, teamwork makes the dream work in the world of software development! 🚀
Tools and Automation
Using Code Analysis Tools
Say hello to your coding sidekick: code analysis tools! These tools work tirelessly behind the scenes, identifying code violations and ensuring your codebase remains squeaky clean. 🛠️
Automate the process of code review with static code analysis tools, saving time and effort while upholding coding standards with unwavering precision. Efficiency at its finest! ⏱️
Integration with Development Environments
Seamlessly integrate coding standards with your favorite IDEs to receive real-time feedback on code compliance. No more guessing games—let your development environment be your guiding star! 🌟
Stay ahead of the curve by leveraging technology to uphold coding standards, paving the way for a streamlined development process. Embrace the power of integration! 🚀
Regular Review and Revision
Conducting Regular Code Reviews
Think of code reviews as a mirror reflecting the essence of your coding standards. Evaluate adherence to coding guidelines, provide constructive feedback, and watch your codebase flourish. 🌿
Foster a culture of continuous improvement by conducting regular code reviews, nurturing a spirit of collaboration and growth among your development team. Together, we code better! 🌈
Updating Standards
In the ever-evolving landscape of technology, one thing remains constant: change. Stay ahead of the curve by updating your coding standards regularly, incorporating industry best practices and adapting to emerging trends. 🌐
Embrace change as a catalyst for innovation, refining your coding standards to align with the dynamic nature of technology. Remember, flexibility is the cornerstone of progress! 🚀
In Closing
Overall, implementing coding standards is more than just a checklist—it’s a journey towards creating scalable, maintainable, and error-free code. Remember, consistency is key, communication is crucial, and continuous improvement is the name of the game in the world of coding standards. So, embrace the power of coding standards, and watch your codebase thrive like never before! 💻🌟

And remember, in a world full of loops and conditions, let your code shine bright with the guiding light of coding standards! ✨✨

Program Code – Best Practices for Implementing Coding Standards
Copy Code

# Import required module
import os

# Define a class to demonstrate best coding practices
class CodeStandardsEnforcer:
    '''
    This class enforces the best practices for coding standards.
    It serves as a static analysis tool to check for coding standards.
    '''

    def __init__(self, file_path):
        '''
        Initializes the enforcer with the path to a file.
        '''
        self.file_path = file_path

    def read_code(self):
        '''
        Reads code from the given file path.
        '''
        with open(self.file_path, 'r') as file:
            code_content = file.readlines()
        return code_content

    def check_standards(self, code_content):
        '''
        Checks the provided code content against coding standards.
        '''
        issues = []
        for line_number, line in enumerate(code_content, start=1):
            # Example standard: Line should not exceed 80 characters
            if len(line) > 80:
                issues.append(f'Line {line_number}: Exceeds 80 characters')
            # Example standard: Functions should have descriptive names
            if line.strip().startswith('def ') and len(line.split()[1]) < 5:
                issues.append(f'Line {line_number}: Function name too short')
        
        return issues

    def display_issues(self, issues):
        '''
        Displays the issues found in the code.
        '''
        print('Coding Standard Issues Found:')
        for issue in issues:
            print(issue)

# Path to the code file to check
file_path = 'example_code.py'

# Creating object of the class
enforcer = CodeStandardsEnforcer(file_path)

# Reading the code from file
code_content = enforcer.read_code()

# Checking for coding standards
issues = enforcer.check_standards(code_content)

# Displaying the issues
enforcer.display_issues(issues)

Code Output:
Coding Standard Issues Found:
Line 10: Exceeds 80 characters
Line 25: Function name too short
Code Explanation:
The program begins by importing os, though it’s not utilized in the snippet, and this showcases a common slight oversight where imports are added but not always used.

We then define a CodeStandardsEnforcer class to encapsulate the behavior of our coding standards enforcement. In the __init__ method, we simply store the file path to the code we want to evaluate.

The read_code method of the class reads the code from a file using a common pattern—opening a file safely with with and reading its lines into a list, which allows us to iterate over them later.

In the check_standards method, we walk through the code line by line. We’re applying two rudimentary checks: ensuring lines aren’t too long and that function names aren’t too short. Obviously, these areas could be far more sophisticated, but for illustrative purposes, we keep it simple.

If a line exceeds 80 characters, we note the issue. Similarly, if a function’s name is too short, that’s also recorded. These checks are just placeholders for the myriad of possible standards one might enforce.

The issues list accumulates any standards violations, which are then printed out by the display_issues method in a human-readable format.

What the code doesn’t cover but is crucial in a real-world scenario is the breadth and depth of actual coding standards that might be applied—everything from naming conventions and comment quality, to cyclomatic complexity and proper exception handling.

This program represents a template for how one might begin to structure a Python tool for enforcing coding standards.

Share This Article
Facebook
Twitter
Previous Article

Exploring the Power of JavaScript Frameworks
Next Article

Leveraging GitHub for Collaborative Coding Projects
Leave a comment
Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *

Leave a comment

Your name
Your email
Your Website


Δ

Follow US
© 2024 CodeWithC.com. All Rights Reserved.
↑
Privacy & Cookies Policy

en_US
English
Beta
0 / 10
used queries
1
logo
TechGeekBuzz

Techies World for Tech Geeks

Tutorials
Blog
Tools
Roadmaps
Search for tutorials and examples
The Ultimate Guide to Best Coding Practices: Tips and Strategies
Posted in SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT

The Ultimate Guide to Best Coding Practices: Tips and Strategies
akhil
Akhil Bhadwal
Last updated on January 20, 2025

Share on:

Table of Content
Coding is the most considerable and crucial skill in the programming domain. It is the backbone of modern technology. Coding is among the most demanded skills not only in the IT domain but also in non-IT industries and businesses, as everyone today utilizes digital technology to carry out their operations.

Every electronic gadget - such as mobile phones, calculators, computers, and laptops - mobile software, websites, etc we use operates due to the code programmers write.

As businesses and companies are incorporating digital technology, professionals with coding expertise are in great demand today. Therefore, gaining coding skills in this era is beneficial for individuals to crack interviews who desire to acquire jobs in renowned companies.

Earlier, coding was recognized as an ability or mastery only for computer nerds and geeks. Today, it is considered a crucial expertise for several job profiles. Before we proceed to best coding practices, we shall first see what coding actually is.

What is Coding?
In simple terms, It is a means of communicating with computers. It is also called computer programming. Programmers write code that tells computers what to perform and how to behave.

A code involves multiple instructions that a computer needs to follow. Computers are not intelligent like humans (although they are picking up the pace with the power of AI ), but they obey all instructions directed by humans. As a result, they perform all tasks that you wish them to do.

15 Best Coding Practices to Follow | Coding Best Practices
In this agile world, developers experience a lot of pressure, as customers wish to have applications with multiple advanced features. Even experienced programmers or developers feel the pressure of developing reliable and fully featured applications.

Therefore, many programmers end up adopting shortcuts for building them but adopting such shortcuts results in subpar applications. Instead of following shortcuts, it is always better for developers to adopt some effective programming techniques that help them in building reliable and top-notch applications.

Below are the best coding practices to follow while developing any software product. These practices not only help developers build good applications but also cuts the use of resources, time, and effort.

1. Stick to the Style Guide
Adhering to a company’s coding style guide or a particular programming language’s style guide is one of the finest practices of coding. Each programming language has a unique style and structure. Therefore, the style guide of a programming language offers you complete information, such as where to use braces, how to use indentation in the code, and naming conventions.

It is always better to go through a programming language’s style guide that you are using for your project. Make sure to concentrate on rare requirements and always remember to implement the rules mentioned in the style guide. In addition, you should not take a shortcut while writing code in order to save time.

Sticking to a programming language’s style guide is not only beneficial for making the code more readable but also for other programmers to make sense of it. They can read your code more easily and, if required, can work on it.

In addition, this coding practice enables programmers to achieve consistency throughout their code. Finally, it becomes more accessible to you and other programmers to detect errors or bugs present in the code.

Many times, companies may modify a particular programming language’s style guide for attaining team efficiency. In addition, they can slightly change the style guide to match their business criteria. Such companies modify the style guide with intelligence and ensure that everyone on the team is aware of this modification.

The major question, however, that arises is how to identify whether the code is following the style guide or not. It is quite simple! A robust tool called Sider enables you to write the code according to the style guide.

The tool helps programmers to write code that is consistent and flawless in terms of style and structure. It verifies your code quality and checks whether the code violates the style.

2. Don’t Reinvent the Codebase
Not coding a program or reinventing the code may seem one of the not-so-smart coding practices, but it may be advantageous sometimes and help save you valuable time.

Before you proceed to frame a code for your project depending upon the specified requirements, there are some significant questions that you must focus on:

Are all features included in a project necessary?
Who can benefit from this project?
Has anyone from my company or an open coding repository coded a similar program?
After thinking of the above questions, you may perceive that the code that you need is already developed or available at any open-source repository. In addition, you can even opt for a SaaS tool to get the required code and save time.

A majority of software developers invest 40% to 50% of their time developing the already available code . It would be, however, more beneficial if you would invest the time looking for the above options to get code readily and save your effort, cost, and time.

3. Develop Readable Code
Writing comprehensible code is one of the best coding practices to consider. If a programmer comes up with a well-optimized codebase that is not legible, it is of no use.

Many times, programmers or software developers demonstrate their expertise by writing a single function in one single line, however, in general, it is not a good practice to follow, as many people cannot understand it.

Readability is as significant as well-optimization for a project’s efficiency. The code that can be understood easily and integrated with other code(base) effortlessly is the one that is legible.

For large and complex projects, several software developers work together. As a result, the code written by one programmer has to be modified by the other one in the later stages of development. Therefore, if the code is good in terms of readability, the other programmer(s) can work on and extend it hassle-free.

PRO TIP
One of the easiest approaches to developing a legible code is to ask yourself these 2 questions:
Will I be able to read or understand the code after a year or two?
If a new developer joins your team, will they be able to understand the code?
4. Document and Comments
Comments play a pivotal role in developing any code. It is considered the most crucial practice to follow in programming.

Comments in programming are simple texts in the English language that tell more information about the source code or describe what the code is for. Even a common person can tell what the code is developed for after reading comments. Every programming language has some provision to add comments.

If you are commenting on a function, you must mention what it is for or how it behaves, what parameters are used, and what will be the output. In addition, you can even write about expected errors and a short summary of steps involved in a function.

PRO TIP
Below are the 2 most significant reasons to use comments while developing any source code:
When working in any company, there is a development team that involves multiple developers. Using comments for different functions and methods in the source code can help other programmers understand the code.
When you observe a code developed a year ago, you may not have a clear idea about the functions or logic used in it. Therefore, if you have used comments for each function or logic, you may understand it more quickly.
Documentation is as significant as using comments in programming. It is brief information about a particular software explaining how it works and how to utilize it. Additionally, it acts as a guide for people that describes what the source code of an application includes and what actions the code performs.

It helps programmers keep track of an application’s every facet. The principal objective of documentation is developing an application, its maintenance, and sharing information with other programmers.

Therefore, reading documentation and adding comments are the 2 most essential practices to be implemented while developing any application.

5. Follow the DRY Principle
Following the DRP principle while developing the source code is yet another best coding practice to execute. Here, DRY means Don’t Repeat Yourself . As its name suggests, you must remember not to repeat what you have worked on or avoid duplication. Andy Hunt and Dave Thomas developed the DRY principle.

DRY represents that every function or logic you develop should be unambiguous. Therefore, there should be no duplication. Alternatively, it states that you should not create the same code repeatedly, which, in turn, would result in wasting time and effort. Therefore, DRY is also known as DIE, where DIE implies Duplication Is Evil .

Most software applications are developed to perform repetitive actions. Therefore, if you write the same code - called boilerplate - repeatedly, you will waste your time. The finest way is to adopt the copy-paste-modify option. Select the code that you need to repeat, copy it, paste it to the desired class in the source code, and change the parameters or variables as required.

Additionally, you can save the most required piece of code in one place that can be beneficial for you in the future or can be used by other programmers. Doing this will help you preserve your time and energy.

6. Test the Code and Respond to Errors
Testing the developed code is an indispensable part of programming. Therefore, it is always better to test the code to verify that there are no defects or bugs. However, if you detect errors or bugs, it is your responsibility to fix them as soon as possible before deploying an application.

If you do not test the source code - at least once - the end-users may definitely experience issues someday while using an application. As a result, they may provide negative reviews and are not likely to use your application. Therefore, testing any software product before its deployment is mandatory and inevitable.

Gone were days when testers performed testing manually. But today, many automated tools are available for testing that have made software testing more accessible and manageable. Testing the code ensures that it functions as expected or specified in the requirements specification. In addition, all defects and bugs in the code are identified in the early phases.

Continuous testing during the development of an application helps programmers or developers detect issues and make changes wherever required. Therefore, testing the code and fixing issues is an unforgettable and the most major coding practice to follow.

7. Restrict the Line Length
You might have experienced circumstances where you need to read a long blog, news, or lengthy article. Most people hate reading long lines or texts. People mostly love consuming short and crisp content. Therefore, one of the best programming practices to implement while developing the code is restricting the number of characters in a single line.

If a single line of code consists of multiple characters, it may look fishy and messy. In addition, many other programmers may find it challenging to read and understand. However, if reading from a terminal window, the ideal character length of a line is 8 characters.

Another code practice to execute while creating the source code is dividing the entire code into smaller modules or units. Instead of searching for the specific function from the whole code, it becomes easier for you when you divide the source code into sections.

Moreover, ensure to split each function or method into an appropriate section to appear fully on a decent-sized window. In other words, ensure that each function consists of 20 to 25 lines. Otherwise, divide the function into 2 small units. Another important tip while dividing the code into digestible sections is to add comments before each function to make it more informative and readable.

8. Maintain Consistency
In English, there is a proverb that we often use; ‘Consistency is the key to success.’ The same applies while developing software. Therefore, maintaining consistency throughout the development process of software products is one of the approaches to follow.

Following the same procedure or steps throughout developing the code is maintaining consistency. Consistency is also defined as uniformity or similarity. For instance, when you create a function that resembles the existing one, you must use an equivalent or similar function name, the order of parameters used, and the code structure.

Another method of making the source code consistent is to follow name conventions. Think about naming your son Olivia or daughter as Williams or John. Weird right? We follow our culture. The same applies when it comes to coding. You must follow naming conventions.

PRO TIP
Below are the 3 significant points that help you maintain consistency in your code:
According to the programming language’s style guide, stick to a snake case or a camel case while declaring variables.
Name all related or closely matching functions, variables, and classes similarly to show relationships between them.
Ensure to write the filename consistently.
9. Avoid Hard-Coding
Hard coding in software development implies inserting data into the source of code of an executable object or the main program. It is not a good practice to follow in programming because the inserted data is unchangeable and inflexible. Therefore, it is always better to avoid hard coding .

Hard-coded data involves unchangeable pieces of code, such as static elements, physical constants, and version numbers. The project’s source code gets changed when the format of the input data changes. Therefore, it is not possible for developers to create a dynamic user interface.

Some source code elements, such as passwords, usernames, system-level settings, and other configuration data, should not be hard coded. Below are some scenarios where developers should avoid hard coding:

While creating a theme.
When changing the site theme.
Building a function to retrieve and display the data.
When the other programmer starts working on your project.
Along with avoiding hard coding, one must also avoid security pitfalls. It is important to observe issues, like buffer overflows and cross-site scripting, based on your chosen programming language. In addition, you must be aware of all the possible risks incorporated in hardcoding and try to avoid them.

10. Code with a Fresh Mind
Coding for a long time may seem a boring and daunting task. However, most developers or programmers spend their days and nights performing coding. But it is not always the case that coding for long hours may end up in a better code. Therefore, one of the best coding practices to follow is to build the code with a fresh and clear mind.

Many studies in the past have proved that people working with fresh minds are 2 to 3 times faster and more efficient than people working for a longer time. In addition, programmers or developers with low energy and tired minds may often make mistakes, which, in turn, would result in errors or bugs.

If there are errors or bugs in the code, the Quality Assurance team has to detect them before deploying an application to end users.

Therefore, it is always better to work with full energy and the utmost attention. You must ensure that you take some short breaks in a day, have coffee, or do activities that may help you freshen up. Moreover, you can have casual talks with your friends or team members but make sure not to miss the deadline and avoid working when exhausted.

11. Keep it Straightforward
Maintaining the code simple and straightforward is another major best coding practice to consider. Maintaining the code simple and easy is as crucial as developing readable code. It is considered that complex code is likely to incorporate more bugs and defects. In addition, it is also important to concentrate on an application’s design, meeting the expectations of stakeholders or end-users.

To make your code easy and simple, you must ensure not to incorporate outdated interfaces, parameterized classes, and factory methods, however, an effective approach, called SIMPLE, helps you develop and maintain your code simply and easily. SIMPLE is an acronym, where each letter in it represents an action, as follows:

S : Strong data types.
I : Immutability, restricting mutability wherever possible.
M : Misuse-proof APIs, avoid using interfaces in the wrong approach.
P : Pure code or functions, determining results using their arguments only.
L : Lean elements, keeping all components of a software product small and focused.
E : Expressive bugs, helpful error messages.
In many situations, developers add a piece of code to avoid some uncovered or non-existing errors but it is not a good practice, as this additional code can confuse other programmers and make it more complex. If in the future, errors arise, you can modify the code to fix them. Until then, try to keep your code simple.

12. Use Descriptive Naming Conventions
Earlier, there were several limitations on naming conventions. Still, today, developers have to follow a few of these limitations on naming conventions. You should be descriptive while using naming conventions, which may help readers and avoid confusion.

Using long and descriptive names in the source code helps your team members and also you in the future acknowledge what exactly it is.

Of course, you can even use short names in your code, but it may be challenging to recollect it after a month or two. Moreover, if any new developer joins your team, they cannot understand short forms. Therefore, using descriptive naming conventions is always the best coding approach.

For instance, consider there is a function that finds the best or lowest price of an item. If you use ‘getLowest,’ it would seem to be confusing and unclear. So instead, you can use ‘getLowestPrice’ or ‘getBestPrice.’

Using such descriptive names will help other programmers understand what the function is and what it does. There are some practices for naming conventions, as follows:

Use a noun for the type name and class name.
Ensure to include a verb for a method or function name.
If a function or method returns the result as ‘Yes’ or ‘No,’ add ‘Is’ as a suffix to its name.
Start with ‘get’ if a function returns an object’s property.
Use ‘set’ at the beginning for a function name if it sets an object’s property.
13. Build a Portable Code
Developing a portable code means it should be compatible with various frameworks and environments. Additionally, ensure to create a buildable code, i.e., you should be able to distribute the code.

To achieve code buildability, you can opt for automation tools that help you create code that can be distributable and quickly testable. Therefore, developing portable and buildable code is among the best programming practices.

14. Collaborate
The most vital and unavoidable coding practice to follow is to collaborate. When developing any application, you must keep in mind that you work in a team and are not alone. In addition, you must also remember that you are one of the team members and have a goal of delivering applications in the least amount of time as a team. As a result, working together is the best coding practice.

While working in a team, it is the responsibility of every team member to share the progress of software applications under development. In addition, the entire team should share their ideas and thoughts to develop better applications. When you communicate with others, you may receive alternate solutions to your problems. As a result, many new ideas may flourish.

Another advantage of working as a team is that if you are an experienced programmer, you may get an opportunity to mentor other junior team members. Conversely, if you are a fresher, you can receive a guide and learn many valuable coding skills from the senior members.

15. Version Control
Version control is the method of tracking the modifications made to an application’s source code. Thus, it is also referred to as source control. One of the best coding approaches is maintaining everything, such as test data, documentation, scripts, etc., under version control.

Furthermore, with version control, all team members can work on the same files parallelly If the new version of the system breaks or crashes, the version control stores the source code’s previous version. In addition, it helps you to understand why modifications are made to an application’s source code. Therefore, you can say that version control helps you manage the backup of the source code.

Modern tools, like GitHub, enable users to store all data or projects and access them anywhere, whenever required. Moreover, developers do not have to worry about data loss due to sudden battery drainage, power loss, or an application glitch with version control.

Conclusion
People love using software that offers a great user experience and is free from bugs and defects, however, the development team needs to implement best coding practices to develop such software products. This post contains popular and widely implemented coding techniques that help organizations develop and deliver top-notch software products.

A good and high-quality software product is one whose source code is readable, understandable, written using a consistent methodology, uses descriptive naming conventions, not incorporating hard coding, and testing it frequently to detect bugs and fix them as early as possible. In addition, maintaining the backup of your code is the most robust coding approach.

Finally, collaboration is a key element in every department of an organization. Having consistent communication between team members helps develop and deliver applications quicker and faster. In addition, adopting all the above coding practices helps organizations build defect-free, reliable, and highly secure applications.

People are also reading:

Best Secure Coding Practices in Java
Your Guide to Starting Python Coding On a MacBook
HTML Style Guide and Coding Conventions
PHP - Coding Standards
Java Cheat Sheet
How to Learn PHP?
HTML Cheat Sheet
HTML Tutorial
SQL Cheat Sheet
CSS Cheat Sheet
Akhil
Akhil Bhadwal
Creating and curating content for 7+ years now. I've worked for different organizations on various capacities and dealt with a wide range of content that includes both tech and non-tech.

Related Blogs
What is Coding? How it Works and What are its Benefits?
SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT
What is Coding? How it Works and What are its Benefits?
The term ‘coding’ has become a buzzword in today’s tech-savvy world. Many aspects…

19 January, 2025
How to Create a Free Apple Developer Account?
SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT
How to Create a Free Apple Developer Account?
You require an Apple Developer Account if you wish to run iOS apps on your Apple device. Due to Xco…

20 January, 2025
What is Software Engineering?
SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT
What is Software Engineering?
Software is defined as a set of data and programming code, or instructions, that performs some cert…

19 January, 2025
Leave a Comment on this Post
Enter Name
Enter Email
Comment....
0 Comments
Tutorials
Python Tutorial
C++ Tutorial
SQL Tutorial
JavaScript Tutorial
CSS Tutorial
HTML Tutorial
PHP Tutorial
Data Structure Tutorial
Docker Tutorial
Java Tutorial
Angular Tutorial
Scala Tutorial
React Tutorial
Top Books
Python Books
C++ Books
C Books
Java Books
PHP Books
Data Science Books
R Books
Top Interview Questions
Python Interview Questions
C++ Interview Questions
C Interview Questions
Java Interview Questions
PHP Interview Questions
jquery Interview Questions
Data Science Interview Questions
Programming Interview Questions
Top Projects
Python Projects
C++ Projects
HTML Projects
Java Projects
PHP Projects
Android Projects
JavaScript Projects
Data Science Projects
AI Projects
techgeekbuzz logo
TechGeekBuzz
Techies World for Tech Geeks

Get the latest tutorials and updates
Enter email address
About Us
Advertising
Privacy Policy
Term and Condition
Blog
Write for us
Roadmaps
Web Stories
© TechGeekbuzz All rights reserved.

Beta
0 / 10
used queries
1
Skip to content
What are coding best practices?
Image of Greg Arious
Greg Arious
Jul 22, 2024 2:00:46 PM
2024-07-22 18:00:46 1721671246832
Unlock the secrets to efficient, clean, and maintainable code with our deep dive into coding best practices.

Understanding the Importance of Coding Standards
Coding standards play a crucial role in software development. They provide a set of guidelines and rules that ensure consistency and readability in the codebase. By following coding standards, developers can easily understand and maintain the code, even when multiple people are working on the same project.

Consistent coding standards also make it easier to debug and troubleshoot issues, as well as facilitate code reuse. Additionally, adhering to coding standards helps improve the overall quality of the software and reduces the likelihood of introducing bugs or errors.

In summary, coding standards are essential for creating clean, organized, and maintainable code, which ultimately leads to more efficient and robust software development.

Key Principles of Clean Coding
Clean coding is a fundamental aspect of writing high-quality software. It involves following a set of principles that promote readability, maintainability, and efficiency. Some key principles of clean coding include:

- Writing code that is easy to understand and follow

- Breaking down complex problems into smaller, manageable units

- Using meaningful and descriptive variable and function names

- Avoiding code duplication through abstraction and modularization

- Keeping functions and classes small and focused on a single responsibility

- Writing clear and concise comments to explain the purpose and functionality of the code

By adhering to these principles, developers can create code that is easier to read, debug, and maintain, resulting in more efficient and reliable software development.

Effective Error Handling Techniques
Error handling is an essential aspect of software development, as it allows developers to anticipate and handle potential errors or exceptions that may occur during runtime. Effective error handling techniques include:

- Using try-catch blocks to catch and handle exceptions

- Providing meaningful error messages to help users and developers understand the issue

- Logging errors to track and analyze the occurrence of errors

- Implementing proper error recovery mechanisms to gracefully handle failures

- Performing thorough testing and debugging to identify and fix potential errors

By implementing these techniques, developers can ensure that their software can handle unexpected situations and recover from errors, resulting in a more robust and reliable application.

Optimizing Code for Performance
Optimizing code for performance is crucial in ensuring that software runs efficiently and responds quickly to user interactions. Some key strategies for optimizing code performance include:

- Using efficient algorithms and data structures

- Minimizing unnecessary computations and iterations

- Avoiding excessive memory usage and memory leaks

- Optimizing database queries and reducing network overhead

- Utilizing caching and memoization techniques

By applying these optimization techniques, developers can significantly improve the performance of their software, resulting in a smoother and more responsive user experience.

The Role of Code Reviews in Enhancing Code Quality
Code reviews play a critical role in ensuring code quality and identifying potential issues or improvements in the codebase. By having multiple developers review each other's code, teams can benefit from the following:

- Identifying and fixing bugs, errors, and vulnerabilities before they make it into production

- Sharing knowledge and best practices among team members

- Ensuring adherence to coding standards and guidelines

- Improving overall code readability and maintainability

- Providing an opportunity for mentoring and learning from more experienced developers

By conducting thorough and constructive code reviews, teams can enhance the quality of their code, promote collaboration, and ultimately deliver higher-quality software.

Related Posts
How long does the system integration process take?
How long does the system integration process take?
Discover the average timeline for system integration and factors that can affect the duration.
Read More
What skills are essential for an IT project manager?
What skills are essential for an IT project manager?
Discover the key skills that are crucial for success as an IT project manager in today's fast-paced...
Read More
What is version control, and why is it important?
What is version control, and why is it important?
Discover the significance of version control in the world of software development and how it can...
Read More
Hours
Monday 10am - 8pm
Tuesday 10am - 8pm
Wednesday 10am - 8pm
Thursday 10am - 8pm
Friday 10am - 8pm
Saturday 10am - 8pm
Sunday 10am - 8pm
USA Federal Holidays *closed*

Contact
+1-860-717-0820
hello@gregarious-software-consulting.com

Location

67 Burnside Ave East Harford, Connecticut 06180 USA

©2024 GREGARIOUS All rights reserved.

Beta
0 / 10
used queries
Skip to the content
Rhy Works
Home
 
CODING
 
3 Basic Principles of Coding
 
Top Tips to Get better at Coding
Expand search form
coding
Best coding practices : Writing Code the Right Way
March 1, 2024 No Comments
A picture of a man infront of a computer

Coding is not just about making things work; it’s about crafting solutions that are efficient, maintainable, and scalable. This guide unveils the principles of coding mastery, providing insights into best practices, clean coding techniques, and standards that elevate your code to the next level. Whether you’re a novice coder or an experienced developer, join us on a journey to write code the right way.

 Clarity and Readability
One of the hallmarks of well-written code is clarity. Code should be readable like a well-constructed narrative, making it easy for others (or your future self) to understand. Use meaningful variable and function names, provide comments when necessary, and follow a consistent coding style to enhance clarity.

 Follow Coding Standards
Adhering to coding standards is crucial for maintaining a uniform codebase, especially in collaborative projects. Whether you’re working with a team or solo, adopting a set of coding standards, such as those defined by the language or your organization, ensures consistency and helps prevent common errors.

Modular and DRY Code
Embrace the principle of Don’t Repeat Yourself (DRY) by creating modular code. Break down your code into smaller, reusable components or functions. This not only enhances maintainability but also reduces the chances of introducing errors when changes are made.

A person coding using a computer
Best coding practices : Writing Code the Right Way
 

Pro Tip for Writing Code the Right Way:
Ultimately, code is a means of communication among developers. Prioritizing clarity in your code ensures that this communication is effective, leading to a more sustainable, collaborative, and successful development process. Strive for elegant simplicity, and your codebase will thank you in the long run.

 

Error Handling and Testing
A robust codebase includes thorough error handling and testing. Anticipate potential issues and implement error-handling mechanisms to gracefully handle unexpected situations. Regularly test your code, both manually and through automated testing tools, to identify and rectify bugs early in the development process.

Optimize for Performance
Efficient code is essential for applications that demand high performance. Optimize your code by identifying and addressing bottlenecks. Consider factors like algorithmic efficiency, memory usage, and the impact of database queries. Regularly profiling and optimizing your code ensures a smooth and responsive application.

 Version Control
Version control systems, such as Git, are indispensable tools in modern coding workflows. Utilize version control to track changes, collaborate seamlessly with others, and roll back to previous states if needed. Branching and merging strategies contribute to a streamlined development process.

 Documentation
Documenting your code is a practice that pays dividends in the long run. Write clear and concise documentation that explains the purpose of functions, the use of variables, and any specific considerations for using the code. Well-documented code facilitates collaboration and makes it easier for others to contribute.

 Continuous Learning
The coding landscape is ever-evolving, with new languages, frameworks, and tools emerging regularly. Stay committed to continuous learning by exploring new technologies, reading industry publications, and engaging with the coding community. Embracing a growth mindset ensures that your coding skills remain sharp and adaptable.

Conclusion: Mastering the Art of Coding
Writing code the right way is an art that combines technical proficiency with creativity and discipline. By following best practices, embracing clean coding principles, and staying attuned to industry standards, you embark on a journey to coding mastery. Whether you’re crafting the next groundbreaking application or refining existing code, the principles outlined in this guide serve as your compass in the vast realm of coding excellence.

FAQS
What are the best practices for writing clean and readable code?
Writing clean code involves using meaningful variable and function names, proper indentation, and clear comments. Follow the principles of readability, such as the DRY (Don’t Repeat Yourself) principle, to create code that is easy to understand and maintain.

How important is code documentation, and what are the recommended practices?
Code documentation is crucial for understanding the purpose and functionality of your code. Use clear and concise comments to explain complex sections, document function parameters and return values, and provide an overview of the code’s structure. Keep documentation up-to-date to ensure its accuracy.

Is it better to prioritize code efficiency or readability?
While both efficiency and readability are important, prioritize readability in most cases. Clear and understandable code is easier to maintain and debug. If optimization is necessary, consider profiling your code to identify specific areas for improvement without sacrificing readability.

How can version control systems enhance code management?
Version control systems, such as Git, are essential for collaborative development. They allow you to track changes, collaborate with others seamlessly, and revert to previous states if needed. Follow best practices, such as creating meaningful commit messages and branching strategies, to optimize version control usage.

What role do testing and unit testing play in writing reliable code?
Testing, especially unit testing, is crucial for ensuring the reliability of your code. Write tests that cover different scenarios and edge cases to catch potential issues early in the development process. Automated testing helps maintain code integrity during ongoing development and refactoring.

You may find this useful:

Code Review Best Practices: Code Quality and Collaboration
Coding Mistakes that many people make
3 Basic Principles of Coding
Coding Tactics : Tactics to Master Programming
Next Post
You may also like
September 13, 2023
programming insights
Programming Insights: Coding and Software Development
January 26, 2024

Coding secrets 2024
January 25, 2023
Becoming an expert in coding
Becoming an expert in Coding
Search for:
Search
Latest News
Best coding practices : Writing Code the Right Way
March 1, 2024
Ten Coding commandments
February 22, 2024
Coding Trends Set to Dominate in 2024
January 26, 2024
Coding secrets 2024
January 26, 2024
Code Review Best Practices: Code Quality and Collaboration
September 29, 2023
Related Articles
3 Basic Principles of Coding
A New Year Update
Coding : What Is Coding?
Difference Between Coding and Programming
Different Types of Programming Languages
Lightsaber Choreography Competition VI
Privacy Policy and Contact Us
Reasons to Code- Why do you Code?
Rhys-Works : About Us
sitemap
Skills Required For Coding
Terms and Conditions
Top Tips to Get better at Coding
Update
We’re going through changes
What the hell is this?
3 Basic Principles of Coding
 
A New Year Update
 
Coding : What Is Coding?
 
Difference Between Coding and Programming
 
Different Types of Programming Languages
 
Lightsaber Choreography Competition VI
 
Privacy Policy and Contact Us
 
Reasons to Code- Why do you Code?
 
Rhys-Works : About Us
 
sitemap
 
Skills Required For Coding
 
Terms and Conditions
 
Top Tips to Get better at Coding
 
Update
 
We’re going through changes
 
What the hell is this?
Rhy Works
Beta
0 / 10
used queries